---
title: 'How to Improve Kick-off Meetings to Spark Collaboration'
author: 'Ghislaine Guerin'
github: ghislaineguerin
twitter: ghislaineguerin
topic: design
bio: 'Process Designer and Facilitator'
description: ''
og:
  image:
---

Could some adjustments to kick-off meetings lead to a more streamlined and
efficient collaboration?

<!--break-->

![kick-off-arches](/assets/images/posts/2020-04-27-facilitate-client-onboarding/kick-off-arches.png)

At simplabs, we believe in working alongside clients throughout projects not
only as a way to get better outcomes, but because we aim to build relationships
rather than just projects.

Kick-off meetings are one of the first things we tackle as part of our process
to deliver digital products. We use them to launch the project and bring the
client on board.

I want to present an approach to kick-off meetings that can spark collaboration
early in the project and create common ground between all project stakeholders.
This approach focuses on creating a mindset that is distinctly different from
the typical frame with which most software projects are conducted.

**That typical frame looks something like this:**

1. Introductions
2. Client Background
3. Project Goals
4. Scope of Project
5. Approach
6. Roles and Responsibilities

#### Kick-Off Meetings Are More Than Just Checklists

To be clear, I think those are good points to cover, however, treating this as a
checklist won't produce any lasting impact on participants. An intentional
facilitated approach is required to make these points come to life and spark
real and honest discussion, as well as to work through conflict.

### Team Introductions Can Serve as a Way to Communicate Organizational and Team Culture

Most teams undergo a gradual process before they can reach peak performance. In
the initial forming stage there is a mix of emotions, ranging from excitement to
anxiety that can affect performance. The same is true for team and client
interactions at the start of a project. Shared culture can have a big influence
on how fast we can advance as a team.

A strong notion of the shared culture of a team will influence interactions with
the client and stakeholders. What is left unsaid, risks being filled with
assumptions, unwritten rules, and pre-existing attitudes towards certain things.
So, how can those invisible parts be made visible during an introduction? Next
time you introduce yourself, make a conscious decision to share your
expectations, what you like, and dislike, and dare to be more personal.

#### Example:

"Hello, my name is Ghislaine, and I will be **working with you** on the design
aspects of this project. I've read your brief, and I find **challenges like
yours fascinating** from a design perspective, especially when it comes to users
creating value for others. I hope to **learn more from your vision** throughout
this project and know that I am always open to discuss things briefly, even if
unrelated to the project, feel free to **send an email if you have any
questions**."

By being intentional about the introduction, we can communicate additional
layers of behaviors we like, how people can address us, what we expect from
them, and what we bring to the table beside our work.

### Helping the Client Describe Their Journey Through Active Listening

The role of clients in projects is significant not only for the obvious reason
that they are the ones whom the project is built for but also because they can
influence the course of action.

A study by the PMI (Project Management Institute) concluded that one of the
biggest reasons for project failure is due to clients realizing new needs during
the design and production phases. Because the client has been overexposed to
their own idea, they mistakenly assume that some details of their journey or
motivations aren't relevant to share. The problem is that when clients cannot
clearly describe their needs at the start, their needs may change throughout the
project.

#### Listen Actively and Delay Judgement

![SCARF MODEL](/assets/images/posts/2020-04-27-facilitate-client-onboarding/scarf.png)

It is not hard to find incongruencies or faults when someone is presenting an
idea, even more so if it's the first time we are exposed to it. We can help the
client connect and provide all the details if we take an active listener
position and delay offering suggestions or advice. It is even better if we can
ask questions that lead them to be more critical of their assumptions.

The reason why this approach works is best explained using the SCARF model from
the domain of neuroscience. This model provides a framework to understand the
common factors leading to threat responses and how we can change directions to
more collaborative win-win scenarios. It helps to explain why active listening
is so effective by providing evidence on how we thrive when learning and
improving, and when attention is being paid to our efforts. Enabling this state
can produce a willingness to do difficult things, take risks, and try new
solutions.

### How do we discuss project goals?

Project goals might be the most critical aspect of this process; after all,
there'd be no need to meet or create something if we had no expectations for a
project's outcome. However, if those expectations aren't clear for everyone, we
might find conflict down the road, and while that's a natural part of projects,
confronting them early is the best way to ensure a smooth process.

#### Recognizing and Avoiding Groupthink

![Circle of Influence](/assets/images/posts/2020-04-27-facilitate-client-onboarding/circle.png)

Groupthink can cause teams to make sub-optimal decisions when they prioritize
conformity over critical reasoning or evaluation. Although it is unintentional,
recognizing it and creating spaces for debate can lead to teams that tolerate
ambiguity and a state of not knowing together.

An excellent way to spark debate is to place the goals and outcomes into the
circle of influence. This is a tool that can help teams discuss goals from a
place of ownership and shared responsibility. The idea is to place the goals
into each sphere of the diagram and explain the reasons why we think we have or
lack control over any desired outcome and things we can do to influence them
positively or reduce the impact of negative factors.

## Next Steps

The facilitator role should continue to be present during the rest of the
project. However, a good start will help everyone handle uncertainty and
conflict a lot better, especially during the hardest parts, but also to
celebrate the shared achievements.

To learn more check out our [playbook](https://simplabs.com/playbook/). It contains a general overview of our
process and how we work together to deliver ambitious projects for our clients.
