---
title: 'Failing (and winning) at planning software projects'
author: 'Marco Otte-Witte'
github: marcoow
twitter: marcoow
topic: process
bio: 'Founder and Managing Director of simplabs'
description:
  'Marco Otte-Witte gives detailed advice on planning software projects and
  scoping as well as preparing work in an iterative process.'
og:
  image: /assets/images/posts/2020-06-17-failing-and-winning-at-planning-software-projects/og-image.png
---

Scoping and planning software projects of any kind is a challenging task that
many teams struggle with. The negative consequences of mis-planning are manyfold
‚Äì teams are unable to give reliable estimates, synchronize dependent activities
(e.g. marketing) with the project's progress or maintain a high level of quality
that will allow maintaining and evolving an application over the long term. In
this post, I will analyse these typical problems in some detail and present
techniques to address and overcome them, reducing uncertainty, risk and
frustration.

<!--break-->

![Strong Collaboration](/assets/images/posts/2020-06-17-failing-and-winning-at-planning-software-projects/illustration.png#full@1000-2000)

## Planning on the Macro Level

When it comes to planning software projects on the macro level, there's two
extremes ‚Äì trying to plan everything up-front or accepting the impossibility of
getting that right and not bothering to plan anything at all. While most teams
will find themselves somewhere in the middle between those two, it's still worth
reviewing them in a bit more detail.

### Over-planning

Historically, in a [waterfall](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Waterfall_model)
based world, over-planning was widely used. The idea behind this approach is to
plan out the entirety of the project up-front in excessive detail, project that
plan on to a timeline and then execute it. Teams practicing over-planning would
write long and detailed specifications that describe all aspects of the project.
They would then break that specification down into a backlog of smaller tasks,
estimate that backlog somehow and extrapolate how long the project will take;
eventually leading to statements like _"We can build the social network for
elephants as described in the 587 page long specification in 67 weeks and it
will cost a total of 1.34 Mio. ‚Ç¨"_.

As we all know now this almost never works as planned, deadlines are missed and
budgets overrun ‚Äì
[as countless examples show](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_failed_and_overbudget_custom_software_projects).

### Under-planning

The opposite of that approach is doing only very little or no up-front planning
at all and just running off. While that removes a lot of pressure from
development teams (designers and engineers in particular), other stakeholders
that have legitimate needs with regards to predictability and insight into a
project's progress are left in the cold. The marketing team will not know when
to book the billboards in the local zoo and the product experts can't set up the
user testing session with a group of sample elephants as they don't know what
features they will be able to test when or whether there will be a coherent set
of functionality that even makes sense as a unit at any time at all.

### Failing agilely

No teams (that I have seen at least ü§û) in reality strictly practice either of
these two extremes. The classic waterfall model fortunately is a thing of the
past now and the shortcomings of having a team just run off with no plan are too
obvious for anyone to be brave (or naive) enough to try it. In fact, developing
products iteratively following an _"agile"_ process (whatever precisely that
term might mean for any particular team) is a widely accepted technique now.
That way, the scope and thus complexity and risk is significantly reduced per
iteration (often referred to as
["sprints"](<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scrum_(software_development)#Sprint>)
‚Äì which I think is a horrible term but that's a blog post of its own right) into
something much more manageable. All planning is then based on estimates of
relatively small tasks (using e.g.
[story points](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Planning_poker)) and productivity
measures based on those estimates (the team's
["velocity"](<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Velocity_(software_development)>)).

In reality however, adopting an agile, iterative process (whether that's
[Scrum](<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scrum_(software_development)>), a team's
own interpretation of it or something completely different) will not magically
solve all of the above problems. Teams will still face budget overruns and not
be able to give reliable estimates even given the short time horizon of a two
week iteration. Unforeseen and unplanned-for complexities and challenges will
still be uncovered only after a task was started, many tasks will span multiple
sprints unexpectedly and already completed features will regularly have to be
revisited and changed even before launching an MVP.

Having moved planning from the macro level where it did reside with the classic
waterfall approach to the micro level of an iteration, that level is also where
the problems were moved to.

## Planning on the Micro Level

Planning on the micro level of an iteration means scoping, bundling and
estimating concrete, actionable units of work. There are countless names for
these units which depend on the particular process or tool in use but in reality
it doesn't matter whether you call them issues, (user) stories or TODOs, whether
you organize them in trees with several levels of subtasks and/or overarching
epics ‚Äì what they are is tasks that one or several team members can work on and
complete, ideally in relatively short time (like a few days at most). A bundle
of tasks defines the scope of an iteration which is what we're planning for on
the micro level.

### Isn't a plan just a guess anyway?

There's a very popular quote from the team behind
[Basecamp](https://basecamp.com), a bootstrapped company that built a hugely
successful project management SaaS with the same name:

[_"Planning is guessing."_](https://m.signalvnoise.com/planning-is-guessing/)

Basecamp explain the idea in more detail in their bestselling book
[_"Rework"_](https://basecamp.com/books/rework). The quote is both great and
widely misunderstood. What it means is that anything beyond a pretty small scope
is inherently not plannable and any plan anyone makes up for it, is essentially
nothing more than a guess. As explained above that is very much true at the
macro level where scope and complexity are way too big for anyone to be able to
fully grasp. What the quote does not mean however, is that you can never prepare
and pre‚Äìassess any work when the scope is limited ‚Äì which is the fact on the
micro level of an iteration.

Yet, many project teams use _"planning is guessing"_ as an excuse to refuse
doing any thorough up-front analysis or preparation of tasks at all. Even if
teams spend time on preparing work before starting it, that preparation is often
superficial only, leaving a lot of uncertainty and risk to be uncovered only
after work on a task has started. Understanding any task fully and in its
entirety does of course require actively working on and in fact completing the
task. It is however very well possible to analyze tasks to uncover hidden
complexity, dependencies and implications ‚Äì not only from an engineering
perspective but also from the perspectives of other stakeholders like design,
product, marketing etc.

Thorough analysis and preparation of tasks will help in understanding the scope
of the tasks, identifying dependent work that needs to be done before or in
consequence or weighing alternative implementation options against each other as
well as against other priorities. All that reduces the uncertainty that is
associated with a task and even while you won't be able to fully eliminate all
uncertainty, eliminating a big part or maybe most of it significantly improves
the reliability of estimates and minimizes unplanned work that is usually
necessary when running into unforeseen complications only after work has
started.

## Winning at Planning through Preparation

In order to improve planning on the micro level, it is essential to conduct
thorough preparation. I will present four key techniques that are essential for
effective preparation of tasks and that simplabs has been practicing
successfully for years.

### 1. The source of tasks

First, let's look at where the work that a product team conducts typically
originates from. In most cases, there are more or less only two sources ‚Äì
feature stories that are defined by the product team and technical changes like
refactorings driven by the engineering team. Ideally both kinds of work are
equally represented as tasks although in many cases that is not the case for
purely technical work. Since that work happens anyway though, not representing
it as individual tasks is a big mistake and leads to part of the work that is
happening not being visible to all stakeholders with all of the negative
consequences that come with that.

So let's assume **all** work that is happening in a project is equally
represented as tasks. Still, in many cases stakeholders would only define their
own tasks without receiving much input from each other. Each stakeholder then
pushes for their tasks to be planned for in a particular iteration. That is not
an effective way of collaborating though and generally not in the best interest
of the success of the project. A successful project needs to take all of the
stakeholder's individual perspectives and priorities into account. After all,
neither focusing on features only and giving up technical aspects like long-term
maintainability and extensibility of the product, nor refactoring the code to
perfection but only shipping too little too late, will result in a success for
the business.

#### Communication üí¨ and Collaboration ü§ù

Successful teams communicate openly and directly and collaborate closely. While
this might read like an obvious statement, in reality there is often lots of
room for improvement. Many teams build walls between stakeholders when they
really would all have to collaborate ‚Äì from product experts to engineering and
design but also marketing, finance and potentially others. That collaboration
starts with agreeing what work should be done in which order and to what level
of depth. Having a collaborative process for this in place makes the entire
development process more effective by eliminating unnecessary complexity or
preventing longer-term decline of a team's velocity.

In many cases for example, there will be different ways to implement a
particular feature that the product experts want to add with drastically
different levels of associated development complexity. Often, it might not
matter much from a product perspective which of these alternatives is chosen and
finding that out early can save the designers and engineers a substantial amount
of time and effort. In other cases, the engineering team might see the necessity
for particular refactorings but there might be conflicting commitments that the
marketing team has to fulfill which justify delaying the refactoring to a later
iteration. In other cases yet, a refactoring might have substantial positive
consequences for the product also from a user's perspective which would lead to
wide support of the undertaking from all stakeholders. Uncovering all these
situations is only possible by communicating and collaborating, not only when
conducting work but already when scoping and planning it. Yet again, as obvious
as this might seem, many teams struggle hard with the consequences of not being
as open.

#### Rotating Responsibility

In our projects, we leverage an iteration lead role. The iteration lead is
responsible for identifying, scoping and preparing all work that is planned to
happen in a particular iteration. They will collect input from all stakeholders,
prepare proper tasks for each request (more on what a proper task is below),
prioritize tasks and present the result to the product team before kicking off
an iteration. Of course, the iteration lead cannot have all of the detailed
knowledge that each stakeholder has about their field and they are not supposed
to ‚Äì they will reach out to the respective experts, bring people together and
make sure communication happens.

![The Iteration Lead role](/assets/images/posts/2020-06-17-failing-and-winning-at-planning-software-projects/iteration-lead.png#@1000-2000)

The iteration lead role is not fixed to a particular member of the product team
but set up as a rotating role among the **entire** team instead ‚Äì every other
iteration the role moves on to a new team member so that every product or
marketing expert, designer or engineer will assume it periodically. Rotating the
role among the entire team is a great way to ensure people get to understand and
appreciate each stakeholder's perspective and are not stuck with their own point
of view only. That appreciation is not only beneficial for the team spirit but
also significantly improves collaboration in our experience. We do not even work
with project managers at all and depend on the iteration lead role instead. In
fact, we see the project manager role ‚Äì at least in its classic shape as someone
directing the product team ‚Äì as an organizational anti-pattern that is most
often necessary only as a consequence of teams that are really dysfunctional at
their core.

### 2. Focussing on the present

As described above, many teams will prepare and maintain an extensive backlog
filled with all tasks that anyone ever brought up or that are expected to
eventually be required for a particular project. What seems like a good idea in
order to have a more complete understanding of the entirety of a project, in an
iterative process the only work that ever matters is what the team is currently
doing and what is being prepared and planned for the next iteration. Everything
else can safely be ignored as it is completely unknown in which way a particular
task will be addressed in the future or whether it will be at all. Everyone has
seen projects with huge backlogs that seem to imply lots and lots of work that
still needs to be done while everyone knows that 90% of the tasks will likely
never be taken on and 75% of them are already outdated anyway (these are made-up
numbers only backed by my personal experience ‚úåÔ∏è).

Actively keeping a backlog is most often simply a waste of time. That is not
only the case for feature tasks but also for bug reports ‚Äì a bug that has not
been addressed for the past six months is unlikely to be addressed in the coming
six months. At the same time it also is unlikely to be really relevant to anyone
and thus unlikely to ever be solved at all (unless it is solved automatically as
a consequence of a change to the underlying functionality maybe).

### 3. Scoping and analysis

Once work has been sourced from the project stakeholders, it needs to be well
understood and scoped. This is a critical step in order to fully understand the
tasks in their entirety and prevent the team from running into unforeseen
problems once the work has started. Of course, it is not possible to always
prevent all problems that might occur at a later point altogether but the more
that is uncovered and addressed earlier rather than later, the smoother
completing each task will go.

First, all of a task's preconditions must be met before it can be worked on at
all. That can include designs being ready or user tests having been conducted
and analysed. It might also mean contracts with external providers have been
signed or marketing campaigns have been booked. Just as important as the
preconditions are a task's consequences which can be technical ones but also
related to features or design ‚Äì a technical change might require a change to the
deployment and monitoring systems; changing feature A might also require
adapting feature B in an unrelated part of the application so that both features
make sense together; switching to a new design for forms might have consequences
for the application's accessibility and marketing materials outside of the
application. Most of such consequences can usually be identified and planned for
up-front ‚Äì in many cases even with relatively little effort.

Lastly, fully understanding a task should result in the ability to break it down
into a series of steps that need to be performed in order to complete it. These
steps do not need to be extremely fine-grained (_"change line x in file y to
z"_) or be limited to what the engineering team needs to do. Instead, they
should reflect on a high level **all** changes that need to be made to all
aspects of the application and related systems to complete the task. Sometimes
it turns out that for a particular task it is not possible yet to identify and
clearly describe these steps. In these cases, it is recommendable to conduct a
spike and prepare a prototype for the aspect that is yet unclear first in order
to understand it better. While this technique comes from the engineering world,
it is not limited to it and is just as valuable for designers and product
experts as well (e.g. for validating particular feature flows or design
approaches with real users before implementing it).

Some teams are adopting full-on
[RFC processes](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Request_for_Comments) for scoping
and defining work like this. In an RFC process, someone or a group of people
would write a document explaining an intended change in relative detail, then
ask all affected stakeholders (or anyone really) for feedback until consensus is
reached and the RFC is ready to be implemented. While that can come with
formalities and process overhead that might not always be justified, it is
generally a good approach and ensures the above points are addressed. Generally,
an RFC process is likely the better suited the wider the topic of a task is and
the larger the team size is. For smaller teams, it might be sufficient to
collaboratively edit a task in the respective tool directly.

### 4. Writing it all down

The final step for proper preparation of tasks is to write all of the
information acquired in the previous steps down in the tool of choice. As stated
above, it does not matter what tool that is ‚Äì good tasks share some common
characteristics that are independent of any particular tool:

- They describe what is to be done and why, potentially accompanied by
  screenshots, mockups/sketches or other visuals that help understand the
  desired outcome; it is also beneficial to add a summary of the task's history,
  covering previous related changes or alternative approaches that have been
  ruled out in the process of scoping the task and also providing the reasons
  for those decisions.
- They include reproduction steps if the task describes a bug; ideally those are
  visualized with a screen recording or other media.
- They list concrete steps that must be taken in order to complete the task (see
  [_"3. Scoping and analysis"_](#3-scoping-and-analysis) above).
- They include all necessary materials that are needed for the task; this could
  be visual assets, links to online documentation for third party libraries or
  APIs or contact details for external parties involved in an issue etc.
- They reference any open questions that need to be answered, or risks that have
  been identified but could not be resolved up-front and that might prevent the
  task from being completed.
- They are a discrete unit of work; tasks should only contain related
  requirements and ideally not represent more than a few days of work - larger
  tasks can often be broken down into multiple smaller ones, possibly even
  allowing for work to happen simultaneously.

![A well prepared task](/assets/images/posts/2020-06-17-failing-and-winning-at-planning-software-projects/issue.png#@1000-2000)

A well prepared task would enable any member of the product team that is an
expert in the respective field to take on and complete the task. However, tasks
are not only written for the team member that will work on them but also for any
other stakeholder that has an interest in the project and needs to know what is
going on at any time ‚Äì be it at the time the task is actively planned or being
worked on or later when trying to understand why something was done
retroactively, what the intentions and considerations were at the time etc.

## Conclusion

Teams are not successful because they adopt a particular process (and
potentially even get themselves certified) or adopt the latest and greatest
project management tools. Success is mostly enabled through relatively simple
values:

- open and direct communication as well as close collaboration among **all**
  stakeholders
- identifying and resolving as much uncertainty and uncovering as much hidden
  complexity as possible on the task level **before** work on the task starts
- **ignoring** all work that is not known to be relevant at the time an
  iteration is planned and executed
- being **detailed** (potentially overly detailed) when describing tasks

Doing all this thoroughly requires a bit of extra time (the iteration lead would
easily be occupied a few days per week with that in addition to the time the
respective experts for each topic invest to give their input). However, thanks
to much improved effectiveness as well as the benefits of improved certainty and
planability, that time pays off manyfold.

We have written all of the values and techniques introduced in this post in much
more detail in our [playbook](/playbook) and welcome everyone to adapt these
patterns and share their experience and feedback with us.
