---
title:
  "On planning software projects – or: why an iterative process doesn't
  magically solve all of your problems"
author: 'Marco Otte-Witte'
github: marcoow
twitter: marcoow
topic: process
bio: 'Founder and Managing Director of simplabs'
description:
  'Marco Otte-Witte gives detailed advice on planning software projects and
  scoping as well as preparing work in an iterative process.'
og:
  image: /assets/images/posts/2020-06-10-the-state-of-pwa-support-on-mobile-and-desktop-in-2020/og-image.png
---

Planning digital product projects is hard and many teams struggle very hard with
it. There are various stakeholders, each with different requirements and
interests that often seem to contradict each other. Management is interested in
in knowing how long an initiative will take and what the final budget will be.
Marketing teams might have to schedule campaigns and book media outlets for
selling a product and thus have to know when it will be ready. Product and
business experts usually cannot know what the final shape of a product will be
unless they have something they can show to users, get feedback on and adapt
their vision to actually build something that will deliver the value users are
looking for. Lastly, engineering teams struggle to give reliable estimates as
they simply cannot oversee all of an initiative's hidden complexities,
dependencies and consequences upfront.

In this post, I will analyze a number of typical problems many teams struggle
with. I will also present techniques that we at simplabs have developed to
overcome those struggles and reduce uncertainty, risk and frustration in product
teams.

<!--break-->

## The Macro Level

When it comes to planning software projects, there's two extremes – trying to
plan everything up-front or accepting the impossibility of getting that right
anyway and not bothering planning anything. While most teams will find
themselves somewhere in the middle between those two, it's still worth reviewing
them first.

### Over-planning

Historically, in a [waterfall](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Waterfall_model)
based world, this technique was widely used. The idea is to plan the entirety of
the project up-front in much detail, projecting that plan on to a timeline and
then executing it. Teams following that approach would write long and detailed
specifications that describe all aspects of the project. They would then break
that specification down into a backlog of smaller tasks and assign effort
estimates to those (using e.g.
[story points](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Planning_poker)). Based on
previously acquired knowledge about how much work a team can get done in a
defined time (it's
["velocity"](<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Velocity_(software_development)>)),
the next step is to extrapolate how long the project will take – _"We can build
the social network for elephants as described in the 587 page long specification
in 67 weeks and it will cose 1.34 Mio. €"_.

Obviously this never works, deadlines will be missed and budgets will overrun.

### Under-planning

The opposite of that approach is doing no or only very little up-front planning
and just running off. While that removes a lot of pressure from development
teams (designers and engineers), other stakeholders that have legitimate needs
with regards to predictability and simply insight into a project's progress are
left in the dark. The marketing team will not know when to book the billboards
in the local zoo and the product experts can't set up the user testing session
with a team of sample elephants as they don't know what features they would be
able to test when and whether there would be a coherent set of functionality
ready to use at any time at all.

### An incremental approach doesn't magically fix things

As stated above, no teams (that I have seen at least 🤞) in reality strictly
follow any of these approaches. The classic waterfall model fortunately is a
thing of the past now and the shortcomings of having a team just run off with no
plan are too obvious for anyone being brave (or stupid) enough to try it. In
fact, developing products iteratively starting with an MVP and incrementally
improving that is a widely accepted technique now. That way, the scope and thus
complexity and risk is significantly reduced and each increment would be broken
down again into iterations (often referred to as
["sprint"](<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scrum_(software_development)#Sprint>)
– which I think is a horrible term but that's a blog post of its own right) so
that the scope is reduced further into something much more manageable.

However, in reality simply adopting an iterative process (whether that's
[Scrum]()https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scrum_(software_development), a team's
own interpretation of it or something completely different) will in reality not
magically solve all of the above problems. Teams will still face budget
overruns, an inability to give reliable estimates even given the short time
horizon of a two week iteration. Unforeseen and unplanned-for complexities and
challenges will still only be uncovered only after a task was started, many
tasks will span multiple sprints unexpectedly and already completed features
will regularly have to be revisited and changed even before launching the MVP.
Also, projecting a team's velocity over the entire backlog to calculate a
timeline for the entire project will usually result in completely unreliable and
made-up numbers.

Having moved planning from the macro level where it did reside with the classic
waterfall approach to the micro level of an iteration, that's also were the
problems are now.

## The Micro Level

Planning on the micro level of an iteration means scoping, bundling and
estimating concrete, actionable units of work. There are countless names for
those which also depend on the particular process and tool in use but in reality
it doesn't matter whether you call them issues, (user) stories or TODOs, whether
you organize them in trees with several levels of subtasks and/or overarching
epics – what they are is tasks that one or several team members can work on and
complete, ideally in relatively short time (like a few days at most). A bundle
of tasks defines the scope of an iteration which in turn is what we're planning
on the micro level.

### Isn't a plan just a guess anyway?

There's a very popular quote from the team behind Basecamp, a bootstrapped
company that built a hugely successful project management SaaS with the same
name:

_"Planning is guessing."_

Basecamp explain the idea in more detail in their bestselling book
[_"Rework"_](https://basecamp.com/books/rework) That quote is both great and
widely mis-understood. What it means is that anything beyond a pretty small
scope is inherently not planable and any plan anyone makes up for it, is
essentially nothing more than a guess. As explained above that is very much true
at the macro level where scope and complexity are way too big for anyone to be
able to fully understand all aspects of a project in sufficient detail to
develop a reliable plan. What the quote does not mean however, is that you can
never do any planning when the scope is limited – which is the fact on the micro
level of an iteration.

Yet, many project teams use _"planning is guessing"_ as an excuse to refuse to
doing any up-front analysis or preparation of tasks at all. Even experienced and
otherwise senior engineers will sometimes refer to their creative energy and
freedom that could be disturbed or even destroyed by thorough preparation. While
it is true of course that understanding any task fully and in its entirety
usually requires working on and in fact completing the task, it is very well
possible to analyze it to uncover hidden complexity, dependencies and
implications – not only from an engineering perspective but also from the
perspectives of other stakeholders like design, product, marketing etc.

Doing so will help understanding the scope of a particular task, identifying
dependent work that needs to be done before or in consequence or breaking down a
task into smaller subtasks that can be done in parallel or maybe release
independently as incremental improvements. All that reduces the uncertainty that
is associated with the task and even while you won't be able to fully eliminate
all uncertainty, eliminating a big part or maybe most of it significantly
improves the reliability of estimates and minimizes unplanned work that is
usually necessary when running into unforeseen complications only after work has
started.

## ~Planning~ Preparation

In order to improve planning on the micro level, it is essential to conduct
thorough preparation. I will present four key techniques that are essential for
effective preparation of tasks and that simplabs has been practicing
successfully for years.

### 1. The source of tasks

First, let's look at where the work that a product team conducts typically
originates. In most cases, there are more or less only two sources – feature
stories that are defined by the product team and technical changes like
refactorings driven by the engineering team. Ideally both kinds of work are
represented as tasks although in many cases that is not the case for purely
technical work – as that work happens anyway though, not representing it as
individual tasks is a big mistake and leads to part of the work that is
happening not being visible to all stakeholders with all of the negative
consequences that comes with.

So let's assume **all** work that is happening in a project is equally
represented as tasks. Still, in many cases each stakeholder would only define
their own tasks without receiving much input from other stakeholders and then
push for their tasks to be planned for in a particular iteration. That is not an
effective way of collaborating though and generally not in the best interest of
the success of the project. A successful project needs to take all of the
stakeholder's individual perspectives and needs into account which requires open
and direct communication. After all, neither focussing on features only and
giving up technical aspects like long-term maintainability and extensibility of
the product, nor refactoring the code to perfection but only shipping too little
too late, will result in a success for the business.

#### Communication 💬 and Collaboration 🤝

Successful teams communicate open and directly and collaborate closely. While
this might read like an obvious statement, in reality there is often lots of
room for improvement. Many teams build walls between stakeholders when they
would all have to collaborate – from product experts to engineering and design
but also marketing, finance and potentially others. That collaboration starts
with agreeing what work should be done in which order and to what extent. Having
a collaborative process for this in place makes the entire development process
more effective by eliminating unnecessary complexity or preventing longer term
declines of a team's velocity.

In many cases for example, there will be different ways to implement a
particular feature that the product experts want to add with drastically
different levels of associated engineering complexity. Often, it might not
matter much from a product perspective which of these alternatives is chosen and
finding that out early can save the designers and engineers a substantial amount
of time and effort. In other cases, the engineering team might see the necessity
for particular refactorings but there might be conflicting commitments that the
marketing team has to fulfill which justify delaying the refactoring to a later
iteration. In other cases again, a refactoring might have substantial positive
consequences for the product also from a user's perspective which would lead to
wide support of the undertaking from all stakeholders. Uncovering all these
situations is only possible by communicating and collaborating, not only when
conducting work but already when scoping and planning it. Yet again, as obvious
as this might seem, many teams struggle hard with the consequences of not being
as open.

#### Rotating Responsibility

In our projects, we define the role of an iteration lead. The iteration lead is
responsible for identifying, scoping and preparing all work that is planned to
happen in a particular iteration. They will collect input from all stakeholders,
prepare proper tasks for each request (more on what a proper task is below),
prioritize tasks and present the result to the product team before kicking off
an iteration. Of course, the iteration lead cannot have all of the detailed
knowledge that each stakeholder has about their field and they are not supposed
to – they will reach out to the respective experts, bring people together and
make sure communication happens.

The iteration lead is not fixed to a particular member of the product team but
set up as a rotating role among the **entire** team – every product or marketing
experts, designer or engineer will assume the role every now and then. Rotating
the role among the entire team is a great way to ensure people get to understand
and appreciate each stakeholder's perspective vs. being stuck with their own
point of view only. That appreciation is not only beneficial for the team spirit
but also significantly accelerates collaboration in our experience. We do not
even work with project managers and depend on the iteration lead role alone
instead. In fact, we see the project manager role – at least in its classic
shape as someone directing the product team – as an organizational anti-pattern
that seems necessary only as a consequence of teams that are really
dysfunctional at their core.

### 2. Focussing on the present

As described above, many teams will prepare and maintain an extensive backlog
filled with all tasks that anyone ever brought up or that are expected to
eventually being required for a particular project. What seems like a good idea
for having a more complete understanding of the entirety of a project, in an
iterative process, the only work that ever matters is what the team is currently
doing and what is being prepared and planned for the next iteration. Everything
else can safely be ignored as it is completely unknown in which way a particular
task will be addressed in the future or if at all. Everyone has seen projects
with huge backlogs that seem to imply lots and lots of work that still needs to
be done while everyone knows that 90% of the tasks will likely never be taken on
and 75% of them are already outdated anyway.

Actively keeping a backlog is most often simply a waste of time. That is not
only the case for feature tasks but also for bug reports – a bug that has not
been addressed for the past six months is unlikely to be addressed in the coming
six months. At the same time it also is unlikely to be really relevant to anyone
and thus unlikely to ever be solved at all (unless it is solved automatically as
a consequence of a change to the underlying functionality maybe).

### 3. Scoping and analysis

Once work has been sourced from the project stakeholders, it needs to be well
understood and scoped. This is a critical step in order to fully understand a
task in its entirety and preventing the team from running into unforeseen
problems once the work has started as good as possible. Of course, it is not
possible to always prevent all problems that might occur at a later point
altogether but the more that is uncovered and addressed earlier rather than
later, the smoother the implementation will be.

First, all of a task's preconditions must be met before it can be worked on at
all. That can include designs being ready or user tests having been conducted
any analyzed. It might also mean contracts with external providers having been
signed or marketing campaigns having been booked. Just as important as the
preconditions are a task's consequences which can be technical ones but also
related to features or design. A technical change might require a change to the
deployment and monitoring systems; changing feature A might also require
adapting feature B in an unrelated part of the application; switching to a new
design for forms might have consequences for the application's accessibility and
marketing materials outside of the application – most of such consequences can
usually be identified and planned for up-front with relatively little effort
even.

Lastly, fully understanding a task should result in the ability to break it down
into a series of steps that need to be performed in order to complete it. These
steps do not need to be extremely fine-grained even (_"change line x in file y
to z"_) and should not be limited to what the engineering team needs to be but
should reflect **all** changes that need to happend to complete the task on a
high level. Sometimes it turns out that for a particular task, it is not
possible yet, to identify and clearly describe these steps. In these cases, it
is recommendable conduct a spike and prepare a prototype for the aspect that is
yet unclear first in order to understand it better. While this technique comes
from the engineering world, it is not limited to it and is just as valuable for
designers and product experts as well (e.g. for validating particular feature
flows or design approaches with real users before implementing it).

Some teams are adopting full-on
[RFC processes](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Request_for_Comments) for scoping
and defining work like this. In an RFC process, someone or a group of people
would write a document explaining an intended change in relative detail, then
ask all affected stakeholders (or anyone really) for feedback until consensus is
reached and the RFC is ready to be implemented. While that can come with
formalities and process overhead that might not always be justified, it is
generally a good approach and ensures the above points are addressed. Generally,
an RFC process is likely better suited the wider the topic of a task and the
larger the team size while for smaller teams it might be sufficient to
collaboratively edit a task in the respective tool directly.

### 4. Writing it all down

The final step for proper preparation of tasks is to write all of the
information acquired in previous steps down in the tool of choice. As stated
above, it does not matter what tool that – good tasks share some common
characteristics that are independent of any particular tool:

- They describe what is to be done and why, potentially accompanied by
  screenshots, mockups/sketches or other visuals that help understand the
  desired outcome; it might also be beneficial to add a summary of the task's
  history, covering previous related changes or alternative approaches that have
  been ruled out and also providing the reasons for those changes.
- They include reproduction steps if the task describes a bug; ideally those are
  visualized with a screen recording or other media.
- They list concrete steps that must be taken in order to complete the task (see
  _"3. Scoping and analysis"_ above).
- They include all necessary materials that are needed for the task; this could
  be visual assets, links to online documentation for third party libraries or
  APIs or contact details for external parties involved in an issue etc.
- They reference any open questions that need to be answered, or risks that have
  been identified but could not be resolved up-front and that might prevent the
  task from being completed.
- They are a discrete unit of work; tasks should only contain related
  requirements and ideally not represent more than a few days of work - larger
  tasks can often be broken down into multiple smaller ones, possibly even
  allowing for work to happen simultaneously

A well prepared task would enable any member fo the product that is an expert in
the respective field to take on and complete the task. However, tasks are not
only written for the team member that will work on them but also for any other
stakeholder that has an interest in the project and needs to know what is going
on at any time – be it at the time the task is actively planned or being worked
on or later when trying to understand why something was done at all, what the
intentions and considerations were at the time etc.

## Conclusion

The above values and techniques are the result of numerous projects with
international teams and many (painful) learnings we made throughout them. Teams
are not successful because they adopt a particular process (potentially even get
expensive certifications) or adopt the latest and greatest project management
tools. Success is mostly enabled by a number of relatively simple values:

- open communication and direct collaboration among **all** stakeholders – this
  is is likely the most important point of them all
- resolving as much uncertainty and uncovering as much hidden complexity as
  possible on the task level
- ignoring all work that is not known to be relevant at the time
- being detailed (potentially overly detailed) when describing the work

While all this requires a bit of time (the iteration lead would easily be
occupied a few days per week with that in addition to the time the respective
experts for a topic spend to give their input), that time pays off manyfold via
much improved effectiveness and the benefits of improved certainty and
planability.

We have written down much more detailed information about all of the values and
techniques introduced in this post in our [playbook](/playbook) and invite
everyone to have a look and share their experience and feedback.
