---
title: 'The guide to making remote work work'
author: 'Marco Otte-Witte'
github: marcoow
twitter: marcoow
topic: process
bio: 'Founder and Managing Director of simplabs'
description:
  'Marco Otte-Witte shares insights gained in many years of successfully
  operating simplabs as a fully remote company.'
og:
  image: /assets/images/posts/2020-11-16-the-guide-to-making-remote-work-work/og-image.png
---

Remote work has been a hot topic in the tech community for decades. While in the
late 90s and early 2000s, relatively few people were actually doing it and there
were quite some limitations to overcome to make it work at all, today in 2020,
remote work is well possible in many industries and even the norm for many
companies already. And of course, the global pandemic that forced everyone to
work from home gave remote work an extra push. In this guide, we will share some
techniques to make a remote working model actually work well for everyone and
not just something we all have to cope with because an international crisis
struck.

<!--break-->

![The guide to making remote work work](/assets/images/posts/2020-11-16-the-guide-to-making-remote-work-work/illustration.svg#full)

## Remotely happy

There are plenty of reasons to adopt a remote working model. Employees get to
choose where to live independently of where they work and save a lot of time and
money on sometimes long commutes (which is also great for the climate – with all
the focus currently being on Covid 19 we must not forget about the real
existential crisis humanity is facing after all). Companies also benefit as they
can attract the best talent from anywhere and are not limited in terms of who
they can hire by their location.

Yet, even as employees and companies alike are eager to adopt remote work and in
theory all the required infrastructure and tools are available, it is still not
easy to get right. Many teams and companies are struggling to go remote and
yearn for the return of the days of the office. The reality is those days are
not going to come back in many industries though and making remote work a
success is going to be one of the key challenges many companies will be facing
in the coming years.

We have run simplabs as a remote company since the beginning. In the early days,
we faced many of the same challenges other teams are struggling with now. Over
time, we overcame each one, and learned a lot along the way. Today, we have team
members in six countries across Europe with people working from co-working
offices in Berlin, kitchens in Augsburg, sheds in Dublin, or even from a
sailboat in Portugal. And we're not the only ones enjoying the many advantages
of working remotely – 90% of remote workers say they plan to remain remote for
the rest of their careers and 94% would even encourage others to work remotely
as well according to
[a study by Buffer](https://buffer.com/resources/state-remote-work-2018/) that
was conducted in 2018.

## A remote culture

Adopting a remote working model does not necessarily have to mean for everyone
to go remote immediately. It can of course be adopted completely and for
everyone but also partially or incrementally as an option only while still
keeping the office for everyone who likes to continue working from it. However,
it is an all–or–nothing kind of change in terms of working culture regardless of
how many team members will actually be working remotely. Remote work requires
fundamentally different practices when it comes to collaboration and management
and a lot of attention to aspects that are less relevant when the entire team
works from the same location.

Possibly the single most important of these aspects is transparency and the flow
and sharing of information. While diagrams, concepts, or calendars pinned to the
wall (or the sticky-notes sprint board that has turned into a status symbol for
teams that "do agile" in the past years) are reasonable and probably good tools
for sharing information among people that all work from the same location, in a
remote environment, these practices don't work. All information shared in such
ways will be completely invisible for everyone who is not in the office,
excluding remote team members from participating in decision-making processes
and preventing them from effectively contributing to the common goal.

![Burn down your sticky notes walls](/assets/images/posts/2020-11-16-the-guide-to-making-remote-work-work/burn-down-your-sticky-notes-walls.jpg#@1000-2000)

While direct communication in the office is not something anyone should
prohibit, all the information and decisions that are made in any conversations
must be made transparent to the entire team. Writing summaries and protocols of
face-to-face conversations or communicating via a chat tool although sitting at
the desk next to the person one is having a conversation with feels strange in
the beginning. It is however a necessary prerequisite for making remote work
work at all and failing to do it properly will alienate remote teammates. In
that way, the pandemic that forced teams to go fully remote all at once at the
same time might even have made the transition easier rather than harder for them
because everyone was in the same position and shared the same perspective.

### Cultivating Trust

Another very important cultural aspect to consider when a team goes fully or
partly remote is trust. Many managers' first reaction, when faced with their
teams working remotely, is asking

_"How can I know my team actually works when everyone is sitting at home?"_

Just because managers cannot **see** the work happening does not mean it does
not happen. Managers' desire to micro-manage teams is an equally bad habit
regardless of whether the team is remote or not – yet, remote teams seem to
increase that desire, often resulting in managers being on everyone's back
constantly and consistently even more than with all of the team working from the
office. However, the occasional check-in for a status update is just as
interruptive remotely as it is in the office.

![Direct messages are interruptive and keep people from working](/assets/images/posts/2020-11-16-the-guide-to-making-remote-work-work/slack.png#@1000-2000)

The reality is that remote workers are likely more productive rather than less
as they will find it easier to focus and be less stressed according to the
[State of Remote Work 2019 report by OWLLabs](https://www.owllabs.com/hubfs/Owl%20Labs%202019%20State%20of%20Remote%20Work%20Report%20PDF.pdf).
Building up that trust and allowing people uninterrupted time to focus while
giving up on micro-management practices is going to be a task for many managers
to learn over the next years.

## Infrastructure and tooling

Working remotely requires adapting a number of infrastructure and tooling. There
are a plethora of great tools available and many companies are even using some
of them already. Which exact tools a team uses is not even so relevant and there
are plenty of options available – mostly those fall into three categories:

- tools for ad-hoc, real-time communication
- tools for knowledge management and sharing
- tools for organizing work and communicating status

While it is important to have tools for all of these use cases, it is equally
important to keep the total number of tools in use to a minimum to prevent
chaos. There is always going to be the new hip tool that everyone wants to try
and doing so often silently makes that new tool part of the de-facto toolset a
team uses, growing that little by little over time. Eventually, teams then end
up with entire landscapes of tools, where nobody knows what kind of information
goes where and although each tool is perfectly good in isolation, in combination
they cause more confusion than they support the team.

### Tools for ad-hoc, real-time communication

Team chat tools like Slack (or Microsoft Teams for the more classic companies)
have seen widespread adoption over the past years and there are only a few
companies that don't use any of those at this point. They have developed into
the backbone for remote work for many teams. While in an office environment,
sending someone or a group of people a chat message saves you having to walk
over to a separate room or building, in a remote environment it is the **only**
way to reach out to someone directly (unless you call the person but who does
phone calls anymore?). What's easy to forget is how interruptive these tools can
be. Sending someone a chat message always implies urgency. Even if we all know
the majority of chat messages we get are in fact not urgent, it's hard to ignore
someone who just starts talking (writing) to you.

While most remote workers experience it is easier to focus, a liberal
communication style on team chat can demolish a lot of that increased focus
again. For effective communication, it is important to be respectful of other
people's time and need to focus on their work. Not everything is urgent all of
the time and justifies notifying a coworker or even a group of people. The fact
that you feel like you need something now doesn't necessarily mean someone else
should stop what they are currently doing to answer you. In many cases, sending
a good old email that is going to be less intrusive and more respectful of the
recipient's time is the better communication option compared to sending the
person a message on team chat asking for something that could totally wait until
tomorrow as well.

At the same time, it is important to keep people in the loop and ensure
transparency of communication when using any kind of communication tool.
Communication that happens via direct messages between two people is invisible
to everyone else, while it might actually be relevant to others as well. As a
rule of thumb, we recommend keeping everything in public channels unless the
topic is strictly confidential or private in nature.

Although the information in public channels will be accessible to everyone, it
is important to understand any real-time communication tool is essentially
ephemeral in nature. While that is not technically correct and most tools do in
fact store all communication indefinitely, even with built-in search
functionality it is practically impossible to find a piece of information you
are looking for that was discussed for example in some Slack channel (you likely
don't even remember which one) the day before. So while team chat is a good
mechanism to communicate among the team in a low effort, informal way, any
information or decisions that are made via it need to eventually make their way
into other, more permanent, and organized systems.

#### Video Conferencing

Besides text-based communication systems, of course, video conferences play a
major role in remote work as well. That way of communication has seen a huge
boost in adoption during the pandemic with everyone isolating at home and many
people using video calls for the first time even (I'm sure everyone had their
_"Dad, the camera is pointing on the floor"_ moments). While late adopters
expectedly struggled with the technology, many remote teams experience similar
problems during their daily work lives. Poor audio or video quality, dogs
barking in the background, calls starting 10min late until everyone has figured
out their setup, etc. are common problems for many teams and have a severe
negative effect on meeting efficiency.

All these problems are easy to prevent when following a number of simple
practices:

- There needs to be proper audio and video hardware in place. For two or more
  people joining a call together that means a proper conference speaker that
  ensures people on the other end will be able to hear everyone in the room even
  if more than one person speaks at the same time and ideally a wall-mounted
  webcam that shows the entire room. For people joining individually, it means
  they must use headsets that ensure good audio quality and do not also capture
  all of their surroundings.
- Turning cameras on so people can see each other makes a big difference in
  communication style – seeing someone's facial expression when they say
  something can often prevent misinterpreting what they are saying. And people
  can still be as slovenly as they like – dressing the upper body is totally
  enough for a video call after all.
- Muting yourself when you're not speaking is good practice but don't forget to
  unmute yourself when you want to say something – luckily most platforms have
  notifications now that warn people if they are speaking while being muted.
- Choosing an appropriate place for joining calls is a matter of respect for the
  other participants. While joining from a nice café or the beach might seem
  like a good idea, it is likely distracting for everyone else who will be
  exposed to the background noises, people walking around in the periphery,
  waiters interrupting, etc.

### Tools for knowledge management and sharing

Knowledge and information management is critical for every team and as mentioned
previously access to all relevant information and transparency for everyone is
essential for successful remote teams. Tools for that like Notion, Confluence or
Basecamp allow collaboratively creating, sharing, and keeping relevant
information. They are the remote equivalents of whiteboards and the place where
feature descriptions or strategy documents live. They must allow everyone to
contribute to the information, have versioning so people can understand who made
what change when, and have commenting functionality so that people can have
discussions about the content.

### Tools for organizing work and communicating status

Tools that track individual work items are the main means of organizing work
among remote teams and clearly communicate the status of each item to everyone.
Options for such tools include Trello, Jira as well as even GitHub or GitLab.
They are not for tracking individual team members' progress and performance but
help teams synchronize. Properly describing the work each item represents,
keeping its status up to date as well as linking relevant information and
decisions to the respective item are essential practices to allow teams to
understand what others are working on and how that might influence what every
team member does.

### The three A's

Whenever switching from a working model that is focussed around an office to a
remote one that will be entirely based on cloud-based tools, it is important to
keep what I'd call the three A's in mind:

- **Accessibility**: tools being accessible to everyone who needs them might
  sound trivial but in reality is often a bigger issue than one might think.
  People are struggling with remembering URLs or accounts for tools or VPNs
  might be unstable. And of course accessibility for people with special needs
  is critical as well to not exclude entire groups of people entirely. Anyone
  who is not able to access a particular tool is effectively blocked from
  contributing their work altogether.
- **Availability**: any set of tools a team might choose must also be available.
  The tools a team uses constitute its backbone and if they are not available
  for some reason, the entire team will be blocked from doing any work. While
  many companies desire to self-host everything in an effort to be on top of
  their infrastructure, in my experience that's often the worst choice and leads
  to friction and people being blocked – unless you're a company that
  specializes in hosting these kinds of tools, you'll likely do a much worse job
  doing so than any third party provider you'd be paying to host things for you!
- **Acceptance**: in particular teams and companies that adopt remote work and
  the respective tools relatively new often struggle with a lack of acceptance
  of these tools among the team. People would sometimes stick to their old
  habits, bypassing the tools, and by that add lots of friction for everyone
  else. It is critical for every member of a remote team to understand that
  opting out of using the tools that are put in place means opting out of
  collaboration altogether and not only poses an annoyance for coworkers but
  also directly hurts the entire team's productivity.

## Distributed together

A challenge that many people adopting remote work face is loneliness. 20% of
remote workers say they feel lonely occasionally according to a the latest
[State of Remote Work report by Buffer (2020)](https://lp.buffer.com/state-of-remote-work-2020).
Also working from their homes is not for everyone and some people need a clear
separation between their work and private environments or want to be among
others during the day. However, a remote working model does not necessarily
require everyone to work alone or from their homes. Teams can still have an
optional office or people could work from coworking locations where they are
surrounded by others although those people might not be their immediate
teammates. After all, remote work is all about options, not about forcing a
particular working environment on anyone. At simplabs, we give everyone the
freedom to choose the work location that is best for them and the only things we
ask for are to ensure a proper internet connection and for everyone to be in
similar timezones – other companies with a less collaborative working style
might not even require that and would sometimes allow people to work from
anywhere on earth really.

Besides everyone feeling comfortable about their individual work environments,
it is also important to keep up a feeling of belonging together and, in fact,
being part of one team although everyone is physically distributed. As everyone
experienced firsthand throughout the pandemic, video calls are not the same as
direct, face-to-face interaction. In our experience, it is essential for
everyone to meet each other in the same location at least twice per year. We
organize team building events where we all come together for a day or two and do
something nice together. These events are not about work since all of that can
be done remotely as well – we use them purely to enable direct social
interaction and keep up our notion of belonging together. Other companies do
similar things, sometimes flying in hundreds of people from all across the
globe. While that implies substantial cost, that cost is paid back manifold
through a boosted team spirit that makes people enjoy work more, relate to their
teammates and their individual situations, and finally making collaboration
smoother and more efficient.

![Spending time together physically is extra important when everyone is distributed](/assets/images/posts/2020-11-16-the-guide-to-making-remote-work-work/oktoberfest.jpg#@1000-2000)

These kinds of events are not possible during the pandemic unfortunately. And
while there is no substitute for these events we need not despair. There are
plenty of alternatives that help us all to get through these times with our
personal environment and similar things can be done in the professional
environment as well. Options start with regular calls with the entire team so
that everyone sees each other every now and then, even if it's just on camera.
It doesn't need to stop there though – you can do virtual drink-ups, game
sessions, hackathons, and plenty of other activities. These are invaluable for
making sure teams don't forget the faces and people behind the screen names they
interact with during work. And when we can, we'll all meet our friends as well
as our coworkers again and celebrate together 🎉.
