---
title: 'The guide to making remote work work'
author: 'Marco Otte-Witte'
github: marcoow
twitter: marcoow
topic: process
bio: 'Founder and Managing Director of simplabs'
description:
  'Marco Otte-Witte shares insights gained in many years of successfully
  operating simplabs as a fully remote company.'
og:
  image: /assets/images/posts/2020-06-17-failing-and-winning-at-planning-software-projects/og-image.png
---

Remote work has been a hot topic in the tech community for decades. While in the
late 90s and early 2000s, relatively few people were actually doing it and there
were quite some limitations to overcome to make it work at all. Today in 2020,
remote work is well possible in many industries and even the norm for many
companies already â€“ and of course the global pandemic that forced everyone to
work from home gave remote work an extra push. There are many more positive
reasons to adopt a remote working model than a potentially deadly virus though.
Employees get to choose where to live independently of where they work and save
a lot of time and money on sometimes long commutes (which is also great for the
climate â€“ with all the focus currently being on Covid 19 we must all not forget
about the real existential crisis humanity is facing after all). Companies also
benefit as they can attract talent from anywhere and are not limited in terms of
who they can hire by their location.

<!--break-->

Yet, even as employees and companies alike are eager to adopt remote work and in
theory all the tools and infrastructure that is needed for it is available, it
is still not easy to get right. Many teams and companies are struggling
switching to a fully or partly remote working model and yearn for the return of
the days of the office. The reality is those days are not going to come back in
many industries though and making remote work a success is going to be one of
the key challenges many companies will be facing in the next years.

In this post, I want to share some insights we have gained by running simplabs
as a remote company since the beginning. In the early days, we've faced many of
the same challenges other teams are struggling with now. Over time, we overcame
each one though and learned a lot along the way. Today, we have team members in
six countries across Europe with people working from co-working offices in
Berlin, kitchens in Augsburg, sheds in Dublin or even from a sailboat in
Portugal. And we're not the only ones enjoying the many advantages of working
remotely â€“ 90% of remote workers say they plan to remain remote for the rest of
their career and 94% would even encourage others to work remotely as well
according to [a study](https://buffer.com/resources/state-remote-work-2018/)
that was conducted in 2018, so even before the pandemic.

## A remote culture

One of the key insights we gained is understanding that remote work is
fundamentally different from working in an office. Going remote cannot mean
mimicking the office and continuing to do the same things, just now remotely. It
requires sometimes substantially different practices when it comes to
collaboration and management and a lot of attention to aspects that are less
relevant when every team member works from the same room.

Possibly the single most important of these aspects is transparency and the flow
and sharing of information. People being out of the loop and not having access
to information that is relevant for their work, is probably the worst threat
remote teams face. While with everyone in the same office, diagrams, concepts or
calendars pinned to the wall (or the sticky-notes sprint board that has turned
into a status symbol for teams that "do agile" in the past years) are reasonable
and probably good tools for sharing information among people that all work from
the same location, for remote team members all of that information is completely
invisible. At the same time, the information is probably relevant for them and
not having access to it means they cannot do their job properly.

TODO: image â€“ burn down your sticky notes walls

The need for transparency and equal access to information for all team members
is also the reason why even companies that only have a few or even only a single
team member work remotely must adopt a remote culture to make that a success.
When most of the team is still working from the same office, it is easy to
forget about the remote team members, still continue with the same practices as
before and only keep the remote people in the loop by sending them updates every
now and then or bringing them in to meetings occasionally. However, doing that
necessarily alienates the remote team members â€“ they lack transparency and
cannot participate in decision making processes â€“ or even if they are given the
opportunity to give their input and express opinions, they won't be able to do
so simply because they lack the necessary insight.

And while that does not mean all of a team always has to go fully remote at the
same time, adopting remote working practices is an allâ€“orâ€“nothing kind of change
starting with the first team member(s) that no longer work from the office.
While direct communication in the office is not something anyone should
prohibit, all the information and decisions that are made in these conversations
must be made transparent for the entire team. While writing summaries and
protocols or communicating via a chat tool although sitting at the desk next to
the person one is having a conversation with feels strange in the beginning, it
is a prerequisite for making remote work work at all. In that sense, the
pandemic that forced teams to go fully remote all at once at the same time might
even have made it easier rather than harder because everyone was feeling the
same pain and sharing the same perspective.

In the longer term, working remotely is not going to be for everyone though and
should not be something that is forced on people. Different people will be able
to adapt to remote work to different extents and not everyone will enjoy not
being surrounded by other people during the day. Out of personal experience, I
can say forcing parents with little kids and no dedicate office room to work
from home means a huge challenge for their entire families (as I'm sure many
people have experienced first hand during the international lockdowns). The
cultural change needs to be complete but that does not mean all of a team have
to work remote all of the time.

### Trust

Another important cultural aspect of switching to a fully or partly remote
working model is trust. Many managers' first reaction when faced with their
teams working remotely is asking

_"How can I know my team actually works when everyone is sitting at home?"_

Just because managers cannot **see** the work happening does not mean it does
not happen though. Managers' desire for micro-managing teams is an equally bad
habit regardless of whether the team is remote or not â€“ yet, remote teams seem
to increase that desire, often resulting in managers being on everyone's back
constantly and consistently. However, the occasional Slack message

TODO: convert this to image

> Hey ðŸ‘‹ How's it going? Project Manager is typingâ€¦ Just wanted to check where
> we are with feature x? Everything still on schedule?

is just as annoying on Slack as it is in real life. The reality is that remote
workers are likely more productive rather than less as they will find it easier
to focus and be less stressed according to a
[study from 2019](https://www.owllabs.com/hubfs/Owl%20Labs%202019%20State%20of%20Remote%20Work%20Report%20PDF.pdf).
Building up that trust and giving people uninterrupted time to focus while
giving up on micro-management practices is a going to be a task for many
managers to learn over the next years.

## Infrastructure and tooling

Successfully working remotely requires adapting a number of infrastructure and
tooling. There is a plethora of great tools available and many companies are
even using some of them already. Which exact tools a team uses is not even so
relevant and there are plenty of options available â€“ mostly those fall into
three categories:

- tools for ad-hoc, realtime communication
- tools for knowledge management and sharing
- tools for organizing work and communicating status

While it is important to have tools for all of these use cases, it is equally
important to keep the total numbers in use to a minimum to prevent chaos. There
is always going to be the new hip tool that everyone wants to try and doing so
often silently makes that new tool part of the de-facto toolset a team uses,
growing that little by little over time. Eventually teams end up with landscapes
that consist of dozens of often similar tools where nobody knows what kind of
information of status goes where and although each tool is perfectly good in
isolation, in combination they cause more confusion than they support the team.

### Tools for ad-hoc, realtime communication

Team chat tools like Slack (or Microsoft Teams for the more classic companies)
have seen widespread adoption over the past years and there are few companies
that don't use one of the options. While in an office environment, sending
someone or a group of people a chat message saves you having to walk over to a
separate room or building, in a remote environment it is the **only** way to
reach out to someone directly (unless you call the person but who does phone
calls anymore?). What's easy to forget though is how interruptive these tools
can be. Sending someone a chat message always implies urgency. Even if we all
know the majority of chat messages we get are in fact not urgent, it's hard to
ignore someone who just starts talking (writing) to you.

TODO: add image showing lots of notifications, messages like "ðŸ‘‹ Hey" etc.

While most remote workers experience it being easier to focus, liberal
communication style on team chat can demolish a lot of that increased focus
again. For effective communication, it is important to be respectful of other
people's time and need to focus on their work. Not everything is urgent all of
the time and justifies notifying a coworker or even group of people. In many
cases, sending an email that is going to be less intrusive and more respectful
of the recipient's time can be the better option than sending the person a
message on team chat asking for something that could totally wait until tomorrow
as well.

At the same time, it is important to keep people in the loop and ensure
transparency of communication when using any kind of communication tool.
Communication that happens via direct messages between two people is invisible
to everyone else, although it might actually be relevant to others as well. As a
rule of thumb we recommend keeping everything in public channels until the topic
is strictly confidential or private in nature.

Although information in public channels will be accessible to everyone, it is
important to understand any realtime communication tool is essentially ephemeral
in nature. While that is not technically correct and most tools do in fact store
all communication indefinitely, it is practically close to impossible to find a
piece of information your are looking for that was discussed in some Slack
channel (you likely don't even remember which one) the day before.

#### Video Conferencing

Besides text based communication systems, of course video conferences play a
major role in remote work as well. That way of communication has seen a huge
boost in adoption during the pandemic with everyone isolating at home and many
people using video calls for the first time even (I'm sure everyone had their
_"Dad, the camera is pointing on the floor"_ moments). While late adopters
expectedly struggled with the technology and everyone is ok with that, many
remote teams experience similar problems during their daily work lives. Poor
audio or video quality, dogs barking in the background, calls starting 10min
late until everyone has figured out their setup etc. are common problems for
many teams and have a severe negative effect on meeting efficiency.

All these problems are easy to get right though when following a number of
simple practices:

- There needs to be proper audio and video hardware in place. For groups joining
  a call together that means a proper conference speaker that ensures people on
  the other end will be able to hear everyone in the room even if more than one
  person speaks at the same time and ideally a wall-mounted webcam that shows
  the entire room. For people joining individually, it means they must use
  headsets that ensure good audio quality and do not also capture all of their
  surrounding.
- Turning cameras on so people can see each other makes a big difference in
  communication style â€“ seeing someone's facial expression when they say
  something can often prevent misinterpreting what they are saying. And people
  can still be as sluggish as they like â€“ dressing the upper body is totally
  enough for a video call.
- Muting yourself when you're not speaking is good practice but don't forget to
  unmute yourself when you want to say something â€“ luckily most platforms have
  notifications now that warn people if they are speaking while being muted.
- Choosing an appropriate place for joining calls is a matter of respect for the
  other participants. While joining from a nice CafÃ© or the beach might seem
  like nice idea, it is likely distracting for everyone else who will be exposed
  to the background noises, people walking around in the background, waiters
  interrupting etc.

### Tools for knowledge management and sharing

Knowledge and information management is critical for every team and as discussed
previously access to all relevant information and transparency across the team
is essential for making a remote working model work at all. Tools for that allow
collaboratively creating, sharing and keeping relevant information. They are the
remote equivalent of whiteboards and the place where feature descriptions or
strategy documents would live. They must allow everyone to contribute to the
information, have versioning so people can understand who made what change when
and have a commenting functionality so that people can have discussions about
the content.

### Tools for organizing work and communicating status

Tools that track individual work items are the main means of organizing work
among remote teams and clearly communicate the status of each item to everyone.
They are not mainly for tracking individual team members' progress and
performance but help others to synchronize their potentially dependent work and
identify blockers.

### The three A's

Whenever switching from a working model that is focussed on an office to a
remote one that will be entirely based on cloudâ€“based tools, it is important to
keep what I'd call the three A's in mind:

- **Accessibility**: tools being accessible to everyone who needs them might
  sound trivial but in reality is often a bigger issue than one might think. In
  reality, people are struggling with remembering URLs or accounts for tools or
  the VPN might be unstable. Anyone who is not able to access a particular tool
  though is effectively blocked from working altogether though and all effort
  invested into improving accessibility will pay off manifold.
- **Availability**: any set of tools a team might choose must also be available.
  The tools a team uses constitute its backbone and if they are not available
  for some reason, the entire team will be blocked from doing any work. That
  means tools must not be offline but also fast and usable. While many companies
  desire to self-host everything in an effort to be on top of their
  infrastructure, in my experience that's often the worse choice and leads to
  friction and people being blocked â€“ unless you're a company that specializes
  in hosting these kinds of tools, you'll likely do a much worse job doing so
  than any third party provider you'd be paying to host things for you!
- **Acceptance**: in particular teams and companies that adopt remote work and
  the respective tools relatively new often struggle with a lack of acceptance
  of these tools among the team. People would sometimes stick to their old
  habits, bypassing the tools and by that add lots of friction for everyone
  else. It is critical for everyone in partially or fully remote teams though to
  understand that opting out of using the remote tools that are put in place can
  not be an option and in fact would mean opting out of collaboration
  altogether.

## Distributed together

- 20% say they feel lonely https://lp.buffer.com/state-of-remote-work-2020
  (during corona though)
- not for everyone and doesn't have to be for everyone, you can still have an
  office or coworking locations
- Separate work and private lives

Problems adapting their minds to remote work is not only something that team
members struggle with sometimes. It's also relatively widespread among
management. A common fear when adopting remote work is _"How can I know my team
actually works when everyone is sitting at home?"_ However, in my experience
that kind of thinking generally only reveals a lack of management competence and
trust. People are not likely to work less or worse only because they do not work
from a company-assigned location. If working from the office actually means they
would be observed and controlled closely by their management team, working
remotely would likely even result in an improvement of productivity since the
oversight is not something people would have to worry about anymore
(nevertheless their management should reconsider their practices). In fact,
increased productivity and better focus was among the top reasons that people
choose to work remotely according to a recent study
(https://www.owllabs.com/hubfs/website/sorw/2020/owl-labs_sorw-2020_report-download_FINAL_07oct2020.pdf?).

What I see many managers, confronted with a suddenly remote team doing, is being
on everyone's back even more than they might be in the office. The occasional

> Hey ðŸ‘‹ How's it going? Project Manager is typingâ€¦ Just wanted to check where
> we are with feature x? Everything still on schedule?

is just as annoying on Slack as it is in real life and, which is much worse,
hugely interrupting. As said above, remote teams need to leverage cloud based
tools like issue trackers etc. and those are the tools where status and progress
is communicated.

With the freedom of remote work comes an increased demand for each team member's
ability to self-organize. While remote communication tools are great, taking
people by the hand remotely is harder than it might be in an office. People will
have to have a more proactive attitude, actively reach out for help or
information they need. The second important skill for anyone working remotely is
communication skills. While that seems counter-intuitive as it might seem remote
teams communicate **less** than teams with everyone in the same office, they
communicate differently and often even more. Instead of the random water cooler
chat, remote teams communicate a lot in written form using the tools discussed
above. Written communication is very different from direct verbal communication
though and it's harder to transport subtle meaning and detail and at the same
time it is easy to be misunderstood or (accidentally) offensive. A key ability
for anyone who wants to work remotely successfully, is the ability to express
themselves in writing.

Finally, when it comes to remote work, one concern is how teams can keep up
their team spirit and feeling of connection. After all, when everyone works from
a different location, you cannot go for lunch together, have an after-work beer
or the occasional round of Mario Kart in between work. Many people have
experienced that in their personal lives in the recent months and will continue
to do so in winter most likely. Virtual drinks are nice and all but the reality
is they cannot be a replacement for real-life, face-to-face interaction. A few
occasions every year where everyone comes together physically for a day or two
totally make up for the lack of physical connection for the rest of the year
though (when coming together, remember to take the train over flying though).

Besides that, there are plenty of other things you can and should do. Having a
weekly call with the entire team (or sub-team depending on the number of people)
where everyone gets to see each other (cameras on!) and talk for 30min or an
hour is invaluable for making sure people don't forget the faces and people
behind the screen names they interact with during work. Until we all are able to
have these kinds of events again though, there are plenty of alternatives like
remote board game sessions and even remote retreats!
