---
title: 'Ember.js in 2021 – a beacon of productivity'
author: 'Marco Otte-Witte'
github: marcoow
twitter: marcoow
topic: ember
bio: 'Founder and Managing Director of simplabs'
description:
  'Marco Otte-Witte makes the case for Ember in 2021 and explains why he
  considers the framework a beacon of productivity in the middle of a roaring
  sea of complexity'
og:
  image: /assets/images/posts/2020-12-29-built-to-last-2-joel-kelly/og-image.png
---

Ember has been around since the early days of the frontend renaissance. It's
almost a decade old by now and dates back well before React, Vue, Svelte and all
the others were released. The framework has never been among the cool kids that
received all the hype but quietly enabled teams to ship steadily and
sustainably. In this post I want to make the case for Ember.js in 2021 and
explain why I consider it a beacon of productivity in the middle of a roaring
sea of complexity. While everyone is obsessed with innovation and change, Ember
allows teams to excel at executing their product vision and focus on shipping
vs. getting lost in low-level rabbit holes where little value is to be found for
users.

<!--break-->

To be completely transparent, I'm biased towards Ember. With simplabs, I founded
what is now the leading Ember consultancy in Europe. We've helped many teams
build, evolve and maintain large applications with Ember over the years. Some of
our team members are involved in the Ember core team. We maintain a number of
widely adopted libraries in the ecosystem and are one of the official sponsors
of the framework even. With all that experience and some experience with teams
using other technology stacks, I think we do have a view on frontend development
that's maybe a bit different from other teams' views and because of that worth
sharing.

## The Status Quo of Frontend Engineering

There has been a huge amount of progress in the frontend engineering world over
the past 10 years or so. Back when Ember.js were first released, jQuery (and
sometimes even Prototype) were still the go-to solutions for making otherwise
static and server rendered pages dynamic. And while jQuery remains
[the most used JavaScript library on the web to date](https://w3techs.com/technologies/history_overview/javascript_library/all/q),
techniques introduced first by Ember.js and Angular.js (and later React, etc.)
are now widely accepted and adopted. While frontend engineering was something
that many _"real"_ developers would look down on in the past and that was often
an afterthought only, the field has been professionalized significantly and now
gets the attention it deserves. That does not only acknowledge the fact that it
is a hugely complex field (and in many aspects more challenging than backend
development) but also its significance due to the direct impact on the end
user's experience.

Things haven't slowed down in the world of frontend development though. In fact,
quite the opposite – we are seeing innovation and change at an extremely high
and seemingly still accelerating pace. JavaScript has become the
[world's dominant language](https://insights.stackoverflow.com/survey/2020#technology-programming-scripting-and-markup-languages)
and is the default answer many developers have to just about anything they might
be dealing with on the web
([even CSS is JS now](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CSS-in-JS)). And while
innovation and exploring possibilities are great, the fact that a huge community
of developers is collectively on the lookout for the next big thing and everyone
is only waiting to jump on the next bandwagon does more harm than people might
see. The level of churn that adopting new approaches over-eagerly, only to
realize the hypetrain has changed direction again and what you bet on is now
unmaintained, is super easy to underestimate.

## The Complexity Fetish

I do think that there's a bit of a complexity fetish in the frontend world
that's driven mainly be two feelings. One is that now that it's finally possible
(and by _"now"_ I mean since a few years really) to apply proper engineering
practices in frontend projects, people feel like they have to catch up. And
while I completely agree that there's a lot to make good for and left to improve
still, I can't help but feel that this is sometimes going just a bit too far to
the point where it has a net negative effect on how well and how fast we can
build products for real users. Of course this also has to do a lot with ego.
Figuring out the best(tm) way to address a particular problem yourself is
potentially more rewarding than using a solution someone else figured out for
you. Solving low level tasks and taming complexity are seen as tasks that only
senior engineers are capable of and by taking on suche tasks, people get a
change of reassuring themselves of their own seniority. I would argue though
that real seniority cannot be achieved without understanding and accepting the
fact that every line of code we write will eventually turn into a liability and
the best developers are capable of delivering product value while keeping the
eventual liability they are introducing along the way at a minimum.

The other feeling that I believe drives the complexity fetish is a desire to be
in control ever every single moving part that makes up people's apps. The same
people that will happily use a framework on the server side and accept the
patterns and rules that comes with, will demand full control of little details
in their frontend stack. That might be driven partly by the Node community's
love relationship with micro packages. I think there's also another, historical
reason though: in the earlier days of JavaScript, one indeed was in full control
about everything since most client code in most apps was a combination of
handwritten snippets and handpicked scripts and widgets. Even as apps work
differently now, a bit of that feeling of needing to have full control just like
in the old days seems to have made it over. Many teams I've seen have strongly
held opinions about what particular routing library they need, why they cannot
use the state management patterns of framework X but have to use a different one
etc. And while many of the arguments will make sense in theory, the practical
impacts are more often than not neglectable. Additionally, all the time and
effort spent on such tasks is **not** going into building and improving real
products for real users.

## Ember: Turning Complexity into Simplicity

Contrary to that, Ember takes decisions away from developers and makes them for
them. It is a full-featured, batteries-included framework and like similar
solutions on the backend side like Ruby on Rails (that it also shares some core
values with), it provides everything one needs to build an app in a coherent
package with a consistent API where the individual parts all work together
seamlessly since they were meant to work together from the beginning. Because of
that, it doesn't allow the level of freedom and fine grained control over every
little detail that many are looking for in the frontend world. And while that
sounds unappealing to many as explained above, it's actually its biggest
strength as it allows teams to focus on executing on their product vision vs.
spending valuable time with low level plumbing or excessive exploration of
potential optimizations etc.

Writing any software system means dealing with a bunch of complexity. That
complexity comes in two forms (see
[Fred Brooks' famous book on the topic](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/No_Silver_Bullet)):
essential complexity and accidental complexity. Essential complexity is how hard
something is to do, regardless of one's experience, technology used etc. It's a
property of the problem you're solving. On the other hand, accidental complexity
is the part of the complexity that is not inherent to the problem one is solving
but introduced as part of the solution really. For example, writing a program
that adds 2 number in C++ is likely more complex than writing the same program
in JavaScript, as in C++ you have to worry about memory management, you have to
compile etc. All of that complexity is accidental as it doesn't come necessarily
with the problem of adding 2 numbers.

Frameworks like Ember.js are all about reducing and hiding accidental
complexity. Since the framework takes care of everything or the vast majority of
things that are not an essential part of a particular application's problem
domain (e.g. routing, data loading etc.), it takes all of the accidental
complexity associated to these aspects out of the realm of the developer and
lets them focus on the essential complexity only. Clearly separating the aspects
the developer is in control of from everything else could be seen as a
[liberating constraint](https://wiki.c2.com/?LiberatingConstraint) – by
constraining control over non-essential aspects, it liberates developers from
doing just that and enables them to spend their time and effort where they truly
add value. In contrast to that, building on micro packages and aiming for fine
grained control over all of an application's building blocks will necessarily
resurface all of that accidental complexity and put the responsibility for it
back into the hands of developers. They now have to deal with webpack
configurations, integration between various packages that can work together but
not without manual wiring etc. All effort spent on that is of course not spent
on addressing essential complexity of the problem domain and building product
value for real users.

At simplabs, we have seen many teams struggling with all kinds of problems and
helped them solve those. In almost every single case, the causes for these
problems are either a failure to deal with the essential complexity of the
problem domain or accumulation of (often unneeded) accidental complexity. We've
rarely seen cases where frameworks like Ember or Rails caused problems due to
the way they handle the non-essential aspects of applications. The more of these
aspects that can be taken away from developers so they can focus on shipping
product value, the better that's going to be for the sustainability of the
application they are building.

## Stability without Stagnation

The fact that Ember.js hides most of the accidental complexity and takes control
over these aspects of applications, doesn't mean nothing can ever change and no
progress can be had. There is steady progress in the framework but Ember.js
shields developer from having to deal with the involved churn directly. Instead,
Ember constantly ships improvements in backwards compatible minor releases with
clear upgrade paths, following its
[release strategy](https://emberjs.com/releases). That allow teams to keep up
with recent developments and benefit from innovation in the frontend field while
minimizing the incurred cost. Changes to Ember itself will have gone through the
RFC process, will have been tested in real apps through the canary and beta
releases and proven to work before being rolled out to the community. So instead
of every single team having to do that work and pay the associated cost
themselves, the framework and community pay that cost once and everyone benefits
afterwards. That's what the community also refers to as the
[safety of the herd](https://embermap.com/notes/62-safety-of-the-herd).

And Ember has seen many substantial changes to its core concepts over the years:

- moving away from the `Ember` global to ES2015 modules
- introducing a new component API
- replacing the core rendering engine of the framework, Glimmer VM
- removing the custom object model and adopting native classes

Those were all substantial changes to the Ember programming model but releasing
each one in a way that makes it easy for the entire community to follow along
has significant value for every single project in the ecosystem. The entire
ecosystem resolving around one defined set of techniques and practices while
making sure no project is left behind on old patterns prevents fragmentation.
The entire community has a collective interest in supporting, maintaining and
evolving the same set of tools and will collectively make sure those continue to
work and work well for everyone using Ember. There is no risk on individual
teams and projects being left on their own because they bet on the wrong horse
that ends up not being actively maintained so that the teams would either have
to take over maintenance themselves or switch to a different solution which
would often result in large refactorings, again directing time and effort into
dealing with accidental complexity rather than essential complexity and
generating product value.

## Web sites vs. apps

As explained before, Ember is a full featured application framework that
contains coherent building blocks and concepts for all aspects that real world
applications face and that are not inherently coupled to their problem domain.
While Ember hides most of the internals of these concepts so developers do not
have to deal with them, all these concepts are still present and contribute to
Ember' public API and general architecture that one is exposed to when working
on any Ember project. This often leads to criticism focussed on the fact that
there is a lot to learn with Ember and some or much of that might not be
necessary for a particular project

> I just want to build a calculator widget for my static site – why do I need to
> worry about routing, error states, etc. for that?

Comments like that are hard to counter. Of course there's no good reason why
someone should be forced to add a route structure and organize templates in
hiearchies when the application they are building is not meant to be routeable
anyway. In reality, this doesn't imply Ember is overly complex though but the
person turned to the wrong tool for a particular job. Most web projects fall
into one of three categories:

- completely or mostly static sites, e.g. your favorite news outlet's site
- dynamic widgets (components) to be used in larger applications or on static
  sites, e.g. the [Intercom](https://www.intercom.com) widget (Intercom are a
  long-time Ember user in their dashboard app)
- full-on web apps that resemble what was only possible in native desktop apps
  until relatively recently, e.g. Gmail or an online banking dashboard like
  [Qonto](https://qonto.com) (another successful Ember user) is building

All of these different kinds of apps are completely different and have very
different characteristics and requirements in terms of interactivity, (load
time) performance requirements and user expectations. Ember as an application
framework is really made for the last kind or project in the above list –
full-on web applications. There are plenty of other and better options for the
other two (and for static sites, I'd argue that a client-side framework is the
wrong choice more often than not anyway; admittedly we went through the
[excercise of completely over-engineering a static site](https://simplabs.com/blog/2020/01/31/how-to-over-engineer-a-static-page/)
as well). **If you're not building a web application, don't look at a web
application framework for a solution.** Yet, many teams would do that and then
be disappointed that the framework they look at isn't a great fit for what
they're planning to build. To me that's a bit like people complaining SpaceX's
rockets are inconvenient to do grocery shopping with. Yes, you might be able to
eventually fly the rocket to the local shop and back to your home but it's not
going to be the most effective way to tackle that task maybe – still, doesn't
mean it's a bad rocket.

## A productive future with Ember

Ember.js has never been the coolest kid on the block. Building on something that
handles a lot of things for you already and doesn't allow for the same level of
freedom as other solutions isn't particularly exciting for many developers.
Enabling superb productivity and offering strong stability guarantees isn't sexy
and I understand that. Choosing solutions that offer more freedom is more often
than not done due to personal curiosity for solving these things (Chris Manson
told me the story about an unnamed developer who loves Ember but would never
recommend it to their boss as that would take away their opportunity to write
code for solving problems they find exciting) or reasons of ego though. Those
can be completely valid reasons to decide for a particular technology sometimes
but most teams don't write apps in order to experiment and learn but to deliver
product value. It takes quite a bit of experience send self-reflectedness to let
go of a bit of vanity and accept that the less you do yourself the better it is
in the interest of the company you build or work for which is ultimately what's
paying the bills and salaries. Ember developers
[frequently are the highest paid and most senior in the annual state of JS survey](https://2019.stateofjs.com/front-end-frameworks/#front_end_frameworks_salary_heatmap)
and I don't think that's a coincidence.

Ember has been an enabler of great productivity for many teams for almost a
decade and I'm sure it's going to continue to be that. It's changed and improved
a lot since its first release and is now in better shape than ever with its
[Octane edition](https://emberjs.com/editions/octane/). All those changes and
improvements were introduced with minimal effort for teams to stay up to date
and migrate their apps in small steps over time. There also is little to no
fragmentation within the community – everyone using Ember.js is basing their
work on the same idioms and techniques coming from a highly cohesive ecosystem.
And when more changes and improvements are to come in the future, they will be
battle-tested before migrating the community and that migration will take
everyone along and leave no app behind.

Qonto and Clark are just two examples of teams executing on their product vision
steadily and sustainably – others are companies building ambitious apps with
large and growing teams like LinkedIn, Apple, Square, Heroku and many more. All
those teams might generate little fuzz and hype but ship product value
constantly and will continue to do so building on Ember which will keep lifting
them to new heights for the time to come.
