---
title: 'actix – an actor framework for the Rust programming language'
authorHandle: tobiasbieniek
bio: 'Senior Frontend Engineer, Ember CLI core team member'
description:
  'Tobias Bieniek gives an overview of actix, an actor framework written in the
  Rust programming language.'
topic: rust
og:
  image: /assets/images/posts/2018-06-11-actix/og-image.png
---

While we mostly focus our work around [Ember.js][ember], [Rails][rails] and
[Elixir][elixir], we sometimes experiment with other technologies for internal
projects. This time we tried out [Rust], and more specifically the
[actix][actix] actor framework. This blog post is a short intro into what we've
discovered so far.

[ember.js]: https://emberjs.com/
[rails]: https://rubyonrails.org/
[elixir]: https://elixir-lang.org/
[rust]: https://rust-lang.org/
[actix]: https://actix.rs/

<!--break-->

## Rust

What is Rust?

Aside from being "an iron oxide" according to [Wikipedia][wikipedia], Rust is
also the name of a programming language that was originally invented by Graydon
Hoare back in 2006. You can think about it as an interesting mix of high-level
languages like JavaScript or Ruby and low-level high-performance languages like
C++.

Similar to C++ it is a compiled language without a garbage collector. The fact
that it usually uses LLVM to compile to machine code means that a lot of the
optimizations that were developed to compile C/C++ code can also be applied to
Rust programs.

Similar to JavaScript or Python the language often feels more high-level than
C/C++, and it has a built-in dependency manager called `cargo`. This is somewhat
similar to `npm` in JavaScript or `bundler` in Ruby, with the main difference
that `cargo` is also used to build and test your applications and libraries.

The main advantage over all the other languages is safety. The Rust compiler is
often quite strict on what data you are allowed to access at what point in the
application logic, because it knows about concepts like threads and potential
race conditions. This might not seem relevant to JavaScript developers, but even
there with nested callbacks you might easily run into a situation where the
thing you're trying to access has been deleted already. This issue is impossible
with Rust.

Why would you use it? It is very fast, it can be embedded into scripting
languages if raw speed is needed, it can compile to WebAssembly, and most of
all, it is much safer than C++, which would also be a candidate for all the
previous points.

How to get started? Follow the instructions at [rustup.rs][rustup]

## Actors

The "actor model" is the main primitive that powers the [Erlang] programming
language and its descendant, [Elixir]. It describes a programming model that
simplifies the development of concurrent and multi-threaded applications or even
applications that run distributed on multiple machines.

An actor is a thing that can only be interacted with using "messages". A message
can basically be anything that the actor can understand and in response to a
message an actor is allowed to do several things, including:

- send a response
- send messages to other actors
- change its own state

Let's look at a simplified example in JavaScript syntax:

```js
class CounterActor {
  constructor() {
    this.count = 0;
  }

  onReceive(message) {
    if (message.type === 'plus-one') {
      this.count += 1;
    }

    return this.count;
  }
}
```

The `CounterActor` class in this example is initialized with an internal state
called `count` that is set to zero and it responds to `plus-one` messages by
increasing the `count` state and returning the new value.

The complexity of actors is relatively low, and that is because the complexity
is usually hidden in the actor frameworks that are used to run these types of
primitives in the end. One example of such an actor framework is [actix], which
we will have a closer look at now.

## actix

[actix] is the low-level actor framework that powers [actix-web][actix-web], a
[high-performance][performance] web framework for the [Rust][rust] programming
language.

While [actix-web][actix-web] is interesting and worth another blog post, we will
focus on the low-level primitive [actix][actix] for now as it is vital to
understanding the higher level concepts.

To get started with actix, let's port our `CounterActor` above to Rust:

```rust
use actix::prelude::*;

// `PlusOne` message implementation

struct PlusOne;

impl Message for PlusOne {
    type Result = u32;
}

// `CounterActor` implementation

struct CounterActor {
    count: u32,
}

impl CounterActor {
    pub fn new() -> CounterActor {
        CounterActor { count: 0 }
    }
}

impl Actor for CounterActor {
    type Context = Context<Self>;
}

impl Handler<PlusOne> for CounterActor {
    type Result = u32;

    fn handle(&mut self, _msg: PlusOne, _ctx: &mut Context<Self>) -> u32 {
        self.count += 1;
        self.count
    }
}
```

Since Rust is a typed language all structures need to be declared upfront. In
the snippet above we first import all the necessary things from the
`actix::prelude` module, and then we define how a `PlusOne` message should look
like. In the JavaScript implementation the `message` had a `type` property, but
since we have a strict type system available in Rust there is no need to
explicitly declare that. That leaves us with an empty `PlusOne` message,
indicated by the `struct PlusOne` which does not have any content. The message
does have a `Result` type though, defined by `type Result = u32;` which means
"unsigned 32 bit integer".

The `CounterActor` implementation is another `struct` which is roughly similar
to a `class` in JavaScript. It does implement several "traits", which is very
roughly what are called "interfaces" in e.g. TypeScript or Java.

The `Actor` trait defines that `CounterActor` is in fact an actor that complies
with the necessary interface to be run by the actix framework. The `Context`
type declaration can be used for more advanced implementations, but for now we
can use the default implementation that is provided by actix itself.

Finally we implement the `Handler` trait for the `PlusOne` message that we
defined earlier. In the `handle()` method we increment the `count` state and
then return the new value to tell actix that this is our response to the
message.

### Running our `CounterActor`

While building the actor was relatively easy, running it is unfortunately still
a little hard while Rust figures out its version of `async/await` (see
[`futures-await`][futures-await]).

The following code will startup our actor, send a message, wait for the
response, send another message, wait for the response and finally exit the
application:

```rust
let sys = actix::System::new("test");

let counter: Addr<Syn, _> = Arbiter::start(|_| CounterActor::new());
let counter_addr_copy = counter.clone();

let result = counter.send(PlusOne)
    .and_then(move |count| {
        println!("Count: {}", count);
        counter_addr_copy.send(PlusOne)
    })
    .map(|count| {
        println!("Count: {}", count);
        Arbiter::system().do_send(actix::msgs::SystemExit(0));
    })
    .map_err(|error| {
        println!("An error occured: {}", error);
    });

Arbiter::handle().spawn(result);

sys.run();
```

The first thing to do when using actix actors is to set up a [`System`][system],
that handles all those actor interactions for us. We do so by calling
`actix::System::new()` and passing it a name.

Next we start an [`Arbiter`][artiter] in a new thread, that runs our
`CounterActor`. If that sounds like a foreign language to you, don't worry, I
had the same feeling at first. For now all you need to know is that `Syn` means
that it is running in a separate thread, and that the `Arbiter` is the thing
that controls that thread.

The `Arbiter::start()` call returns an `Addr` (short for address), that we can
use to talk to the actor. The `Addr` struct has methods like `send()` that can
be used to send messages to the actor and receive their responses.

Rust is very strict around data ownership, and the "borrow checker" makes sure
that data access can only happen in safe ways. Since we use the `counter`
variable for the first `send()` call, we are (at least currently) not allowed to
reuse it inside the callback. Instead we need to create a `clone()` and use that
one instead.

The large code structure in the middle of the snippet looks roughly like a
Promise-chain in JavaScript, and it is exactly that. The `counter.send()` call
returns what Rust calls a `Future`. A `Future` (like a `Promise`) has several
methods that can be used to assemble a sort of pipeline of how to handle the
result that the `Future` will at some point return.

In this specific case we use `.and_then()` to wait for the result of the
`PlusOne` message, then print it out to the console, and then fire off another
`PlusOne` message. Once that second message has returned we print the response
again and then use a special system arbiter call to exit the process.

The major difference between a `Promise` in JavaScript and a `Future` in Rust is
that a `Promise` automatically runs when it is created, but a `Future` needs to
be started explicitly. This difference exists for performance reasons, and
because in JavaScript there is no such thing as running on different threads.

To start the `Future` that we have assembled we use the
`Arbiter::handle().spawn()` function, and then finally start the `System` once
everything is wired up correctly to block the current thread until all actors
have finished running.

## Summary

This blog post covered some of the basic concepts of writing actors using the
actix framework for Rust. In a follow-up post we will look into writing a small
TCP client using these primitives, which can for example be used to forward
traffic to websocket clients or just log the received messages to the console.

[rustup]: https://rustup.rs/
[wikipedia]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rust
[erlang]: https://www.erlang.org/
[performance]:
  https://www.techempower.com/benchmarks/#section=data-r15&hw=ph&test=plaintext
[actix-web]: https://github.com/actix/actix-web
[futures-await]: https://github.com/alexcrichton/futures-await
[system]: https://actix.rs/actix/actix/struct.System.html
[arbiter]: https://actix.rs/actix/actix/struct.Arbiter.html
