---
title: 'Git Good - The magic of keeping a clean Git history'
authorHandle: real_ate
topic: misc
bio: 'Senior Software Engineer, Ember Learning Core Team member'
description: |
  Chris Manson goes into detail about the benefits of a clean git history and
  describes some tips and tricks that really help you clean up your branches and
  Pull Requests
og:
  image: /assets/images/posts/2021-05-26-keeping-a-clean-git-history/og-image.png
---

This post is designed to help you form a solid mental model while working with
Git both professionally and in an open source project, and how to ensure you are
following best practices to make the process easier for everyone.

<!--break-->

![Trying your GitHub Actions locally illustration](/assets/images/posts/2021-05-26-keeping-a-clean-git-history/illustration.svg#full)

This topic was inspired by some of my pairing sessions with my colleague
[Tobias Bieniek](https://twitter.com/tobiasbieniek) and the concepts laid out in
this post have become invaluable to me while working with open source
development. If you haven't already checked out
[Tobias' blog on Open Source maintenance](/blog/2018/11/27/open-source-maintenance/)
I would highly recommend checking it out after reading this post ðŸŽ‰

## Git complexities

Git can sometimes be complex to get your head around. Most of us learn Git up to
a point where we're happy to use it day-to-day and then stick to the few
commands that we are comfortable with without trying anything too fancy. Most of
the time this works out, but then every so often we do something wrong or
someone asks us to rebase or "squash" something and we either panic and/or mess
up our git repo ðŸ˜« This is such a common feeling that sites like
[Oh shit, git!](https://ohshitgit.com/) have cropped up to help us _get out of
our messes_.

It's my belief that a number of factors have held developers back from becoming
super productive with Git, and with a bit of guidance in pairing sessions I can
usually help people to unlock their full potential while using Git. This
potential I am talking about is not anything so complex as dealing with the
reflog, or knowing anything about blobs or the internals of Git, I am just
talking about people feeling comfortable understanding branches, rebasing,
cherrypicking, and have the ability to clean up a branch before submitting it to
a Pull Request (PR).

The most egregious thing that holds back people's understanding of Git is the
concept that "if you don't use git on the command line then you're not a real
developer" and this idea it needs to die. Sure there are plenty of places in the
tech community where we have a gatekeeper problem, but this particular idea of
"you're not a real developer if you don't do X" is the most pervasive and
destructive. The fact that we funnel so many junior and intermediate developers
into using git on the command line, I believe, has significantly hampered their
ability to truly master Git.

This is why, whenever I get the chance, I always recommend people to just
download [Fork](https://git-fork.com/). I have always been a visual learner so
when I think about Git I very much **see** the branching model in my head. Even
if you don't know exactly what you're looking at when you see the Fork
interface, you will pick up the concepts of branching in Git much faster when
you see a command's effect on the tree visualisation rather than an abstract set
of characters in the command line.

![Screenshot of Fork with a number of branches](/assets/images/posts/2021-05-26-keeping-a-clean-git-history/fork-screenshot.png)

## It's all in the eye of the reviewer

So what is the point of mastering Git and becoming a rebasing wizard with the
ability to rewrite history like you are Hermione Granger wielding a time turnerâ€½

The point of this post is not to get everyone rebasing their branches for the
sake of feeling cool, but instead I hope that more people learn **just enough**
Git skills to achieve one simple goal: make your pull requests more focused and
understandable to improve their chance of getting merged quickly (or even
getting merged at all).

Making sure your pull requests have a good Git history can really streamline the
review process for your colleagues or maintainers of Open Source projects, and
has the added benefit of keeping the Git history clean in the long run. This
will help your colleagues, or even your future self, understand the thought
process behind your PR if you ever need to go back and do some code archaeology
to figure out why something was added or changed in the codebase.

Open source projects tend to receive a large number of PRs out of the blue, some
of them are great but sometimes you get the dreaded "rewrite all your code" PR.
These are often very hard to ever get merged (if you would even want to merge
them) because they end up touching too much stuff in the same PR and can make it
next to impossible to review properly.

I like to say to people interested in getting involved in OSS "the smaller the
PR the more likely it will be to get merged". This doesn't just apply to
external contributors. When I'm working on any Open Source project that I
manage, I try to take this into account and split any large rewrite or
substantial change into a series of smaller iterations.

It is also important to note that when I refer to a "change" I'm not referring
to the classic Git reporting of _number of lines changed_. We are not computers
and we don't really care how many bits were flipped in a Pull Request. What we
really care about is the **number of concepts** that changed in a particular PR.
I have discussed this a bit with my colleagues and the best example I can come
up with is that I don't mind a PR that fixes 1000 instances of a linting rule as
long as it's the **same conceptual change** in all lines that are changed. If
you change 10 instances of one rule and 1 instance of another rule, the
cognitive load of reviewing that PR becomes too much.

While this post inspired by my work in open source, I have also recently given a
[Git Workshop](https://simplabs.com/resources/workshop/effective-git) for a
client where we communicated the exact same concepts: "the smaller the PR the
more likely it will be to get merged quickly". And if you or your employer cares
about efficiency then this can only be a good thing ðŸ˜‰

## Smallest number of commits for the smallest conceptual change

So far I have been writing in terms of abstract ideas. This may be useful to a
few people but I think most people would find it a bit difficult to convert what
I have said so far into meaningful strategies to improve their Pull Requests in
future. Let's look at a concrete example that illustrates the point that I'm
trying to make with this blog.

Let's assume you now have a good "small" PR. I am calling this "small" because
it might have a lot of lines changed, but it is only one **conceptual** change
as I described in the last section. This PR of yours may be small from a
conceptual perspective, but it may have taken you quite a few commits to
complete it. Here is an example PR that I know has too many commits:
https://github.com/ember-learn/guides-app/pull/19

If you look at the
[list of commits](https://github.com/ember-learn/guides-app/pull/19/commits) you
will see commit messages that look like:

- Testing Percy integration
- Revert "testing percy integration"
- fixing the Percy ignore rules

This is a great example of something that isn't very helpful for people
reviewing, and it also doesn't tell us anything meaningful about the work that
was done. This is essentially showing everyone your **failed experiments** and
is one of the examples of things that are so objectively unhelpful that we can
even make a rule about it:

> Rule 1: Don't waste your reviewer's time by showing them all your failed
> experiments in your Git history.

Some people might see commits like this and use this as a justification to
recommend squashing commits when merging this PR. I happen to disagree with this
sentiment because I believe this wipes out all the history of what happened in
this PR. Git history is fundamentally useful, as long as it is clean.

In case anyone doesn't know exactly what I mean by "squashing commits when
merging this PR" let me show you the Git history when you do a squash-merge and
compare it to a merge-commit. Here is a screenshot of what the branch looks like
before you have merged anything:

![Screenshot of a branch that is ready to be merged](/assets/images/posts/2021-05-26-keeping-a-clean-git-history/pr-ready.png)

The following photo is what it looks like when you create a merge commit when
merging on Github (the default behaviour):

![Screenshot of a the branch merged using a merge commit](/assets/images/posts/2021-05-26-keeping-a-clean-git-history/merge-commit.png)

This next photo is the same merge action on Github but this time using the
"squash and merge" functionality of Github:

![Screenshot of a the branch merged using a squash commit](/assets/images/posts/2021-05-26-keeping-a-clean-git-history/squash-commit.png)

You might think that there isn't much of a difference between these screenshots,
and from a "code on disk" perspective you would be right. The same code will be
in the `master` branch at the end of both of these operations, but as you can
see the history is very different. You are only able to see the previous commits
in this example because they are still on the remote `origin/feature/deploy`
branch and I have a local copy of that branch on my computer. If you delete that
remote branch all other contributors to this repo in the future would see a
history that looks a little bit more like this:

![Screenshot of a the branch merged using a squash commit](/assets/images/posts/2021-05-26-keeping-a-clean-git-history/actual-history-after-squash.png)

As I mentioned at the beginning of this post, you should always be thinking
about brave explorers that may be digging into the history of your code a year
from now trying to figure out what was done and **why** it was done that way. A
single commit that has a diff with `+4,762 âˆ’1,368` changes will be very hard to
understand and will likely slow down anyone who is doing serious code
archaeology.

These examples all come from a branch that I created for a now deprecated
repository. As it turns out, the branch was so big and the history was so
unhelpful that whoever merged that branch chose to squash and merge so the
history was lost. I was only able to revive the history for these examples using
some extreme git mastery that is far above what a reasonable code archaeologist
should be expected to do when trying to figure out what happened, and which also
doesn't work if you're trying to do a git-bisect to find the source of an issue.

The answer to this problem is to maintain a Git history closest to the **true
essence** of the work done, creating a number of small PRs that each makes **one
releasable change** to the codebase and keeping the number of commits as low as
possible. The question becomes, how can we effectively do that?

## Rebasing, fixups, and moderate git mastery - a case study

I'm going to spend some time actually fixing the PR that I was using as an
example in the previous section. This way you can see a practical example and
see a good before-and-after shot to compare the difference. I will also go into
some detail about each technique that I will use to actually perform the changes
in question.

Some of the techniques that I will be using are rebase, interactive rebase,
fixup, cherrypicking, and commit splitting. Reading this list you might feel
like this article is targeted at the advanced Git user, but I would say that
this is not the case. With a tiny bit of guidance I believe every developer can
start making use of these powerful intermediate git tools and improve their
workflows.

First things first, if you want to follow along with my examples you will need
to install the Git client called [Fork](https://git-fork.com/). I now use Fork
exclusively when I'm trying to do anything that requires you to have an image of
the Git history in your mind. This is mainly because it gives you such a great
visualisation of the history and you can actively see the effect your changes
have. Each of the examples in the previous section are screenshots from Fork.

It is also worth mentioning that using Fork is not something that I consider
optional for the techniques that I am about to go through. Sure you can achieve
everything that I'm about to show you using only the command line, but I have
seen much more experienced developers than I struggle and make catastrophic
mistakes while using git on the command line. When people see examples of what I
do regularly with git and think I'm some sort of Git wizard, I usually tell them
that I'm just playing the game on easy mode using a visual Git tool like Fork.
If you take anything away from this article let it be to ignore any gatekeepers
in the industry that might tell you "you're not a real developer if you don't
use Git on the command line" and just start using Fork for 90% of the operations
that you do with Git.

Now it's time to get started. The first thing that I like to do when trying to
split a giant PR into multiple smaller PRs is to go through each of the commits
and see very roughly what they are doing. This gives you a feeling for what the
overall PR is trying to achieve and it should allow you to locate any smaller
issues that can be fixed right away. To do this I literally just click through
each commit on the branch and browse some of the changes in Fork, starting at
the **bottom** of the branch in Fork because the oldest commit is at the bottom
and the newest is at the top.

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube-nocookie.com/embed/0l4hvOa4bac?rel=0" title="Embedded video of browsing the git history" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

Looking through the commits I have already seen a whole bunch of simple issues
that could be fixed. The most obvious and easiest to fix is the pair of commits
`testing percy integration` and `Revert "testing percy integration"`. This is a
perfect example of the thing I said earlier in this post where you **should not
show the reviewer your failed experiments**. If our branch didn't have either of
these commits the outcome would be exactly the same, so let's remove them!

Note: Instead of trying to write out the full instructions of how to make these
changes I will demonstrate each of the techniques used in the rest of this post
in an embedded video. This has the benefit of being able to see the exact steps
that I need to do in Fork to achieve the intended goal and avoids any chance
that I missed a step in my description.

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube-nocookie.com/embed/HbWmZbhN-A4?rel=0" title="Embedded video of removing reverted commit" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

The next thing that I'm going to demonstrate is using the "fixup" command when
in an interactive rebase. This is another useful tool when trying to not show
the reviewer any of your failed experiments. The way I like to think of this
particular technique is that, firstly, all the commits in your PR should be
considered as being _additive_ in that they are adding a feature or a concept to
the codebase (even if you're actually deleting files). Each of the commits
should be building on top of each other to get from the current state of the
repo to the added concept, and you should do that in a straight line and not
zig-zag back on yourself. What this means in practice is that you should
**never** see a commit that "fixes lint" on something that was added in a
previous commit. So let's **fixup** some of these "fix lint". Commits now.

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube-nocookie.com/embed/_20fveDyDEI?rel=0" title="Embedded video of using fixup to remove fix lint commits" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

Looking through some of the other commits I can see there is one that fixes some
lint issues that were actually introduced in multiple different commits. This
makes it a tiny bit more difficult to fixup because we can't just apply it to a
single commit in our existing history. The way around this is to split this
single commit into multiple commits using the "edit" command during an
interactive rebase:

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube-nocookie.com/embed/4JSRVws9a2k?rel=0" title="Embedded video of using edit in an interactive rebase" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

Once the commit has been split we can then use fixup again exactly as we did in
the previous example.

Now that we have the skills needed to cleanup all the "fix" commits, I'm going
to go ahead and apply these techniques to the rest of the branch. Just to be
clear, I'm not going to use any techniques other than what I have explained so
far in this post.

After about 20 minutes of investigating and rebasing I have ended up with a new
history that is a significant improvement from what we had before

![Screenshot of an improved history in Fork](/assets/images/posts/2021-05-26-keeping-a-clean-git-history/improved-history.png)

This has improved the commit list from 34 commits to 22! But this is still far
too many commits for a single reviewer to be expected to look at all at once.
The problem that we currently face is that there are multiple "features" or
"logical changes" happening in this branch, and if we were to convert this
branch into a PR then we would be breaking one of my only rules: a PR should
only be making a single logical change.

So let's start pulling out some logical Pull requests! I'll start with a super
simple one to demonstrate using interactive rebase or cherry-pick to pull out a
single commit.

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube-nocookie.com/embed/h5f8ibnEm0c?rel=0" title="Embedded video of creating a new branch for a pull request" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

As you can see in the video, creating the new branch using interactive rebase or
using cherrypicking results in identical branches. It doesn't matter which
method that you use but I would recommend getting comfortable with each method
as they both can be useful depending on the situation. Once you have this branch
you can go through your normal process of pushing to GitHub and opening a PR.
Once that PR is merged we will then need to rebase our feature branch on master,
which should usually automatically remove the commits that we split out into the
other PR. This time it just needs to be a standard rebase without using
interactive rebase, and it should cause no issues. I have included a quick video
of that process for completeness:

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube-nocookie.com/embed/xEnwBpDBXNg?rel=0" title="Embedded video of rebasing on master after pull request was merged" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

And that's it! I have now shown you all of the techniques that you need to be
able to clean up your git history and truly make your reviewer's days better. I
would encourage you to try out these techniques and get more comfortable with
them over time, and hopefully you will start reaching for these techniques on a
regular basis.

I've spent a little bit of time applying the techniques described above to the
rest of the commits in the `feature/deploy` branch as a demonstration of what it
will ultimately look like. Here it is for reference:

![Screenshot of the finished version of the branch with everything cleaned up](/assets/images/posts/2021-05-26-keeping-a-clean-git-history/finished-version.png)

This screenshot is a perfect example of a git history in my opinion. It has
plenty of very small PRs that only have one commit in them, allowing the PR to
be reviewed and merged very quickly. It also has clear and understandable
commits in the larger PRs that can be reviewed commit-by-commit if the reviewer
would prefer, while still encapsulating the similar commits in a branch (and not
over-splitting branches and PRs).

## Summary

When I started writing this post I didn't expect it to be quite as long as it
turned out, but hopefully this can be a holistic guide for anyone who is using
Git but doesn't have a clear mental model for best practices around PRs,
merging, squashing, and rebasing.

While everything in this post is completely optional, I hope that you can see
the benefits and maybe adopt some of the ideas in your own workflow.

If you need help with any of these topics or if you have questions we encourage
you to [contact us](https://simplabs.com/contact/)!
